Let's say we have a function that takes an array as an argument and just returns the same -

    const makeStatus = <T extends string[]>(statuses: T) => {
        return statuses;
    };

Here, we have a generic function 'makeStatus' that takes an array of strings as an argument and returns the same array. The type parameter 'T' is constrained to be an array of strings ('string[]'), which means that any array passed to this function must be an array of strings.

What if we call it like -

    const statuses = makeStatus(['INFO', 'ERROR', 'WARNING']);

What do you think will be the type of 'statuses'?

Well, it will be inferred as 'string[]', which is the type of the array we passed to the function.

What if we want to infer the type as -

    ["INFO", "ERROR", "WARNING"]

That is, an array of string literals.

Remember, the choices of what do you want your type arguments to represent do matter and can have an impact on the types that TypeScript infers for your variables.

All we care about in our case are the members of the array, not the array itself. Right now, our generic type argument 'T' represents the entire array, which is why TypeScript infers the type of 'statuses' as 'string[]'.

But, what we want is for the generic type argument 'T' to represent the members of the array, not the array itself. To do that, we can change our function to -

    const makeStatus = <T extends string>(statuses: Array<T>) => {
        return statuses;
    };

And boom! Now, when we call -

    const statuses = makeStatus('INFO', 'ERROR', 'WARNING');

You will see that the type of 'statuses' is now inferred as ["INFO", "ERROR", "WARNING"] instead of 'string[]'.

So again, this shows how the choices of what do you want your type arguments to represent do matter and can have an impact on the types that TypeScript infers for your variables. In this case, by changing our generic type argument 'T' to represent the members of the array instead of the entire array, we were able to get a more specific type inference for our variable 'statuses'.