Alright, let's start with generics.

Generics are a powerful feature in TypeScript that allow you to create reusable components that can work with a variety of types rather than a single one. They provide a way to create functions, classes, and interfaces that can operate on different data types while still maintaining type safety.

Let's start with a simple example where we have a function that returns the value passed to it -

    const returnWhatIPassIn = (t: unknown) => {
        return t;
    }

Here, we have a function 'returnWhatIPassIn' that takes a parameter 't' of type 'unknown' and returns it.

So, we can use it but there is one issue. When we call this function, TypeScript cannot infer the type of the returned value. It will always be of type 'unknown', which means we lose type information -

    const numberValue = returnWhatIPassIn(42); // numberValue is of type unknown
    const stringValue = returnWhatIPassIn("Hello"); // stringValue is of type unknown
    const booleanValue = returnWhatIPassIn(true); // booleanValue is of type unknown

How do we tell TypeScript to retain the type information? This is where generics come into play. We can modify our function to use a generic type parameter 'T' like this -

    const returnWhatIPassIn = <T>(t: T) => {
        return t;
    }

At first, this syntax might look a bit strange, but let's break it down.

The '<T>' before the function parameters indicates that this function uses a generic type parameter 'T'. The parameter 't' is of type 'T', and the function returns a value of type 'T'.

Basically, any type that is passed to the function will be used as the type for 't' and the return type.

So now, when we call this function, TypeScript can infer the type of the returned value based on the argument we pass -

    const numberValue = returnWhatIPassIn(42); // numberValue is of type 42
    const stringValue = returnWhatIPassIn("Hello"); // stringValue is of type "Hello"
    const booleanValue = returnWhatIPassIn(true); // booleanValue is of type true

You can think of it like this -

    type ReturnWhatIPassIn<T> = T;

    type numberType = ReturnWhatIPassIn<42>; // numberType is of type 42
    type stringType = ReturnWhatIPassIn<"Hello">; // stringType is of type "Hello"

Here, we have a Type Helper named 'ReturnWhatIPassIn' that takes a type parameter 'T' and simply returns it. This is essentially what our generic function is doing.

Now, yes, we could've annotated the return type of the function explicitly like this -

    const returnWhatIPassIn = <T>(t: T): T => {
        return t;
    }

But TypeScript is smart enough to infer the return type.

