We all know what 'as const' does in TypeScript. It allows us to create a literal type from a value, which can be useful in certain situations.

For example, if we have an object -

    const obj = {
        a: 1,
        b: 2,
        c: "Hello"
    } as const;

Doing this will turn the type of 'obj' into:

    {
        readonly a: 1;
        readonly b: 2;
        readonly c: "Hello";
    }

This means, the properties of 'obj' are now read-only and their types are the literal types of their values. This can be useful when we want to ensure that the values of 'obj' cannot be changed and that they have specific types.

So, what if we want to achieve the same using Identity Functions?

We know that whatever we pass to an Identity Function, it will return the same value.

So, if we have -

    const asConst = <T>(value: T) => value;

What if we pass our object to this function?

    const obj = asConst({
        a: 1,
        b: 2,
        c: "Hello"
    });

Well, it doesn't really work right now because we can see that the type of 'obj' is still:

    {
        a: number;
        b: number;
        c: string;
    }

So, not only it doesn't make the properties read-only, but it also doesn't give us the literal types of the values.

# CONST TYPE PARAMETERS

In TypeScript 5.0, a new feature called 'const Type Parameters' was introduced.

By default, when inferring the type of an object, TypeScript will usually choose a type that’s meant to be general. That is why, in our case, it inferred the type of 'obj' as:

    {
        a: number;
        b: number;
        c: string;
    }

In TypeScript 5.0+, you can now add a 'const' modifier to a type parameter declaration to cause const-like inference to be the default.

So, we can simply say -

    const asConst = <const T>(value: T) => value;

So now, if we say -

    const obj = asConst({
        a: 1,
        b: 2,
        c: "Hello"
    });

The type of 'obj' will now be:

    {
        readonly a: 1;
        readonly b: 2;
        readonly c: "Hello";
    }

So, now, not only are the properties of 'obj' read-only, but they also have the literal types of their values.

But there is one gotcha with this approach. If we try to pass a variable to the 'asConst' function, it will not work as expected. This means, we cannot do -

    const obj = {
        a: 1,
        b: 2,
        c: "Hello"
    };

    const constObj = asConst(obj);

This will not work. We have to pass the object literal directly to the 'asConst' function for it to work as expected. I think the reason why it does not work is because TypeScript has already inferred the type of 'obj' as:

    {
        a: number;
        b: number;
        c: string;
    }

So, when we pass 'obj' to the 'asConst' function, it will not be able to infer the type of 'T' as the literal type of the object, but rather it will infer it as the general type of the object.