So, let's see how can we add constraints to the Identity Functions.

Suppose, we have an identity function -

    export const narrowFruits = <TFruits>(t: TFruits) => t;

All it does is, it takes a type parameter 'TFruits' and returns the same type.

So, we can use it like -

    const fruits = narrowFruits([
        {
            name: 'apple',
            price: 1
        },
        {
            name: 'banana',
            price: 2
        }
    ]);

The very first thing we want is our Identity Function to infer the literal types of the properties of the objects in the array.

We know that we can do that using the 'const' modifier on the type parameters themselves -

    export const narrowFruits = <const TFruits>(t: TFruits) => t;

And that works fine.

But now, we have another requirement.

Right now, we can call 'narrowFruits' with any value. That means, we can even do -

    const notFruits = narrowFruits("adadasd");

We want to ensure that whatever we pass to 'narrowFruits' is an array of objects that have a 'name' property of type string and a 'price' property of type 'number'.

Well, we know that we can add constraints to type parameters using the 'extends' keyword.

So, let's try that -

    type FruitData = {
        name: string;
        price: number;
    }

    export const narrowFruits = <const TFruits extends FruitData[]>(t: TFruits) => t;

Well, this should work, right? And yes, it does not allow us to call 'narrowFruits' with a string anymore.

But, there is another issue now.

    const fruits = narrowFruits([
        {
            name: 'apple',
            price: 1
        },
        {
            name: 'banana',
            price: 2
        }
    ]);

Now, the type of 'fruits' is no longer a 'readonly' array. It is now a mutable array. But that is not what we wanted. We wanted a 'readonly' array.

The solution is to also make our 'FruitData' constraint a readonly array -

    type FruitData = ReadonlyArray<{
        name: string;
        price: number;
    }>

    export const narrowFruits = <const TFruits extends FruitData>(t: TFruits) => t;

Now, the type of 'fruits' is a 'readonly' array of objects that have a 'name' property of type string and a 'price' property of type number.

This is how we can add constraints to an Identity Function in TypeScript. Remember that if you are using the 'const' modifier on the type parameters, you need to ensure that the constraints are also compatible with the 'const' modifier.

In this case, we had to make our 'FruitData' constraint a 'readonly' array to ensure that it is compatible with the 'const' modifier on the type parameter.

Otherwise, we would have ended up with a mutable array type instead of a readonly array type, which is not what we wanted.



