In generic functions, inference works like magic sometimes. But, there are also times when we do not want inference to happen. We want to specify where inference should not happen.

For example, let's say we have a function -

    interface FSMConfig<TState extends string> {
        initial: TState,
        states: Record<TState, { onEntry?: () => void }>
    }

    export const makeFiniteStateMachine = <TState extends string>(config: FSMConfig<TState>) => config;

Here, we have an identity function 'makeFiniteStateMachine' that takes a configuration object for a finite state machine. The type parameter 'TState' is constrained to be a string.

Now, we can call it like -

    const config = makeFiniteStateMachine({
        initial: "a",
        states: {
            a: {
                onEntry: () => console.log("a");
            },
            b: {} // ERROR
        }
    });

But the issue right now is that we are not allowed to pass any other state than 'a' inside the 'states' object and that's because of how 'TState' is being inferred. Since we have 'initial' property that is of type 'TState', TypeScript infers 'TState' to be the literal type "a". And since 'TState' is constrained to be a string, it does not allow us to have any other state than "a" in the 'states' object.

So, 'states' is of type -

    Record<"a", { onEntry?: () => void }>

This is not good. Ideally, we should want 'TState' to be inferred as the any one of the states passed to the 'states' object. So, we should be allowed to provide other states as well.

For example, if we had -

    const config2 = makeFiniteStateMachine({
        initial: "c",
        states: {
            a: {}, // ERROR
            b: {} // ERROR
        }
    });

Now, we will get an error on both 'a' and 'b' because 'TState' is inferred to be "c" and since 'TState' is constrained to be a string, it does not allow us to have any other state than "c" in the 'states' object. But ideally, 'TState' should be inferred as any of the states passed to the 'states' object. And in this case, the error should be on the 'initial' property because "c" is not a valid state in the 'states' object.

So, how do we tell TypeScript where inference should not happen? How do we tell TypeScript to infer 'TState' from the 'states' object and not from the 'initial' property?

# 'NoInfer' UTILITY TYPE IN TYPESCRIPT 5.4+

Starting with the release of TypeScript 5.4, we have a new utility type called 'NoInfer' that allows us to specify where inference should not happen.

So, we can use it like -

    interface FSMConfig<TState extends string> {
        initial: NoInfer<TState>,
        states: Record<TState, { onEntry?: () => void }>
    }

Here, we are saying that we do not want inference to happen on the 'initial' property. We want inference to happen only on the 'states' object.

So here, 'initial' will be a valid state in the 'states' object and we will get an error if we try to provide a state that is not in the 'states' object. But, the actual inference for the 'TState' will happen only using the keys of the 'states' object. This is exactly what we want.
