We know what Mapped Types are in TypeScript. They let us create new types based on existing ones by transforming each property in some way.

There is actually pattern in TypeScript called 'Reverse Mapped Types', which can be really helpful in some scenarios. And this pattern works only with generic functions.

Let's take an example to understand this.

Let's say we have an identity function -

    export function makeEventHandlers(obj: unknown) {
        return obj;
    }

This identity function takes an object and simply returns it. We can call it like -

    const obj = makeEventHandlers({
        click: (name) => { // ERROR - Parameter 'name' implicitly has an 'any' type
            console.log(name)
        },

        focus: (name) => {
            console.log(name)
        }
    });

Right now, we get an error because 'name' implicitly has an 'any' type. Ideally, what we want is that whatever function we pas a value in the object, that should get an argument with the same type as the 'key'.

In other words, if we pass a function for the 'click' key, then the argument of that function should be of type 'click'. Similarly, if we pass a function for the 'focus' key, then the argument of that function should be of type 'focus'.

Ideally, we want our object type to be -

    {
        click: (name: 'click') => void;
        focus: (name: 'focus') => void;
    }

So, how can we achieve that?

We know that we will need to at least infer the type of object passed in the function so let's add a generic type parameter for that -

    export function makeEventHandlers<TObj>(obj: TObj) {
        return obj;
    }

Alright, so this means now, if you hover over the function, it will infer the type properly -

    function makeEventHandlers<{
        click: (name: any) => void;
        focus: (name: any) => void;
    }>(obj: {
        click: (name: any) => void;
        focus: (name: any) => void;
    })

But, right now, the 'name' parameter is still of type 'any'. We want it to be of type 'click' for the 'click' key and 'focus' for the 'focus' key.

Let's say we want to do the same with a normal object that we have. How will be do it? We will probably use Mapped Types like this -

    type X = {
        click: string;
        focus: string;
    }
    type Y = {
        [K in keyof X]: (name: K) => void;
    }

So, in this case, Y will become -

    {
        click: (name: "click") => void;
        focus: (name: "focus") => void;
    }

We want something of this sort in our case. But all we have is the generic type parameter 'TObj'. Can we map over the keys of this generic type parameter? Yes, we can! We can do something like this -

    export function makeEventHandlers<TObj>(obj: {
        [K in keyof TObj]: (name: K) => void;
    }) {
        return obj;
    }

This is such an interesting pattern. We are basically using a Mapped Type in the parameter of a generic function. This is what we call 'Reverse Mapped Types'. This means, the mapped type here is present from where ideally, TypeScript would try to infer the type of 'TObj'.

    const obj = makeEventHandlers({
        click: (name) => {
            console.log(name)
        },

        focus: (name) => {
            console.log(name)
        }
    });

Now, everything works perfectly fine. The type of 'obj' is now -

    {
        click: (name: "click") => void;
        focus: (name: "focus") => void;
    }

An interesting thing to note is that if you hover over the function, you will see that it infers the 'TObj' as -

    function makeEventHandlers<{
        click: unknown;
        focus: unknown;
    }>(obj: {
        click: (name: "click") => void;
        focus: (name: "focus") => void;
    })

So here, the 'TObj' is inferred as an object with 'click' and 'focus' keys, but the types of those keys are inferred as 'unknown'. This is because we are using a Mapped Type in the parameter, and TypeScript is not able to infer the types of the keys properly. But that's okay, because we don't actually need the types of the keys in 'TObj', we just need the keys themselves to create our mapped type.

This is actually what we call 'Reverse Mapped Types'. We are using a Mapped Type in the parameter of a generic function. Even if we have a mapped type in place of the parameter, TypeScript is still able to infer the type of 'TObj' properly, which is really cool!

# REVERSE MAPPED TYPES

Reverse mapped types are when TypeScript infers a type variable by working backwards through a mapped type. Instead of you telling TS what 'T' is, TS figures out 'T' by looking at the shape of the argument you passed.

Normal mapped types are like this -

    type Wrapped<T> = { [K in keyof T]: { value: T[K] } };

So, you give TS a type 'T', and it creates a new type where each property is wrapped in an object with a 'value' key.

In case of 'Reverse Mapped Types' -

    function unwrap<T>(arg: { [K in keyof T]: { value: T[K] } }): T {...}

    const result = unwrap({ name: { value: "Alice" }, age: { value: 30 } });

TypeScript can go the other direction. You give it the wrapped shape, and it infers the original 'T'.

So here, TS looked at the argument, saw { value: string } and { value: number }, and reverse-engineered that 'T' must be { name: string, age: number }. You never stated that explicitly. It was inferred by working backwards through the mapped type. That's the essence of 'Reverse Mapped Types'.

This also means that TS can only reverse-map when the type parameter 'T' appears inside a mapped type (i.e. [K in keyof T]). That structure is the "hook" that lets TS infer 'T[K]' from the value at each key.

This is reversible -

    type Mapped<T> = { [K in keyof T]: Something<T[K]> }

Here, TS can infer 'T' from the shape of the argument.

This is not reversible -

    type NotMapped<T> = { [K in keyof SomeOtherType]: Something<T> }

Here, 'T' is not tied to the keys of the argument, so TS has no way to infer 'T' from the shape of the argument. It would just be a generic type with no information about what 'T' actually is.