What if we have a javascript file where we have this piece of code - 
    
    const message = "Hello World!";
    message();

Do you think the code editor will show any error in the code? No it will not! Because we are working with JavaScript which does not check the types at compile time. It only does this checking when the code actually runs.

When we run the code, we will get this error - 

    TypeError: message is not a function

And it makes sense because the variable "message" is a string and so it cannot be called as a function.

It’d be great if we could avoid mistakes like this.

When we run our code, the way that our JavaScript runtime chooses what to do is by figuring out the type of the value - what sorts of behaviors and capabilities it has. That’s part of what that TypeError is alluding to - it’s saying that the string "Hello World!" cannot be called as a function.

For some values, such as the primitives string and number, we can identify their type at runtime using the typeof operator. But for other things like functions, there’s no corresponding runtime mechanism to identify their types. For example, consider this function:


    function fn(x) {
        return x.flip();
    }

We can observe by reading the code that this function will only work if given an object with a callable flip property, but JavaScript doesn’t surface this information in a way that we can check while the code is running. The only way in pure JavaScript to tell what fn does with a particular value is to call it and see what happens.

This kind of behavior makes it hard to predict what the code will do before it runs, which means it’s harder to know what your code is going to do while you’re writing it.

JavaScript only truly provides dynamic typing - running the code to see what happens.

The alternative is to use a static type system to make predictions about what the code is expected to do before it runs.

If we add just a bit of code, save our file, re-run the code, and immediately see the error, we might be able to isolate the problem quickly; but that’s not always the case. We might not have tested the feature thoroughly enough, so we might never actually run into a potential error that would be thrown! Or if we were lucky enough to witness the error, we might have ended up doing large refactorings and adding a lot of different code that we’re forced to dig through.

Ideally, we could have a tool that helps us find these bugs before our code runs. That’s what a static type-checker like TypeScript does. Static types systems describe the shapes and behaviors of what our values will be when we run our programs. A type-checker like TypeScript uses that information and tells us when things might be going off the rails.

So, what is Typescript?