TypeScript offers all of JavaScript’s features, and an additional layer on top of these: TypeScript’s type system.

For example, JavaScript provides language primitives like string and number, but it doesn’t check that you’ve consistently assigned these. TypeScript does.

This means that your existing working JavaScript code is also TypeScript code. The main benefit of TypeScript is that it can highlight unexpected behavior in your code, lowering the chance of bugs.

TypeScript knows the JavaScript language and will generate types for you in many cases. For example in creating a variable and assigning it to a particular value, TypeScript will use the value as its type.

For example, if we write - 

    let helloWorld = "Hello World";

By understanding how JavaScript works, TypeScript can build a type-system that accepts JavaScript code but has types. This offers a type-system without needing to add extra characters to make types explicit in your code. That’s how TypeScript knows that helloWorld is a string in the above example.


So, if we have the following code in typescript - 

    const message = "Hello World!";
    message();

We will immediately get an error in the code editor saying -

    This expression is not callable.
    Type 'String' has no call signatures.

And we get this error message even before our code runs. That's the benefit of static type-checking.

# NON-EXCEPTION FAILURES

Sometimes, the JavaScript code does not throw any error in the runtime but still, the behavior is something we do not want. For example, if we have the code below in javascript - 

    let userName = "Jack";
    let hasLoggedIn = true;

    hasLoggedIn += " Herrington";

    console.log(hasLoggedIn)

If we run the code, then no errors will be thrown and we get output as - 

    true Herrington

But, is this a behavior we wanted? Ofcourse not. There is no use of having a boolean variable and then adding a string to it. The issue here is that JavaScript does not do strict type checking so it allows that. And hence, when the code runs, JavaScript will convert the boolean from true to a string "true" and then attach " Herrington" to it.

But, if the same code is written in a typescript file, then without even running, the code editor will already highlight the line where we are doing the string concatenation with a boolean. And even if you run it, the output will be an error that says - 

    Type "string" is not assignable to type "boolean".

Which makes sense because since "hasLoggedIn" is a boolean, when we update its value, the new updated value should also be a boolean. We cannot assign a string value to it.

And there are many such examples in JavaScript where it tries to do things in a way we do not want. 

For example, the ECMAScript Specification says that trying to call something that isn’t callable should throw an error. Maybe that sounds like “obvious behavior”, but you could imagine that accessing a property that doesn’t exist on an object should throw an error too. Instead, JavaScript gives us different behavior and returns the value undefined.

    const user = {
        name: "Daniel",
        age: 26,
    };

    user.location; // returns undefined


Ultimately, a static type system has to make the call over what code should be flagged as an error in its system, even if it’s “valid” JavaScript that won’t immediately throw an error. In TypeScript, the above code produces an error about location not being defined:

    Property 'location' does not exist on type '{ name: string; age: number; }'.

While sometimes that implies a trade-off in what you can express, the intent is to catch legitimate bugs in our programs. And TypeScript catches a lot of legitimate bugs.


For example: typos,

    const announcement = "Hello World!";
 
    // How quickly can you spot the typos?
    announcement.toLocaleLowercase();
    announcement.toLocalLowerCase();
 
    // We probably meant to write this...
    announcement.toLocaleLowerCase();


uncalled functions,

    function flipCoin() {
        // Meant to be Math.random()
        return Math.random < 0.5;
    }

    The Error shown is - 

    Operator '<' cannot be applied to types '() => number' and 'number'.

or basic logic errors.

    const value = 0.2 < 0.5 ? "a" : "b";
    if (value !== "a") {
        // ...
    } else if (value === "b") {
        // Oops, unreachable
    }

    In above code, the else if block will never run because value will always be "a" since 0.2 < 0.5 is always true. So, Typescript will show an error message saying - 

    This comparison appears to be unintentional because the types '"a"' and '"b"' have no overlap.