Whenever you will work with Typescript, you will need to install the Typescript Compiler or "tsc".

You can install it globally by installing Typescript globally - 

    npm install -g typescript

You can use npx or similar tools if you’d prefer to run tsc from a local node_modules package instead.

Now, let's create a new .ts file and write a simple console.log and save the file - 

    console.log("Hello World");

And then, we write the following in the terminal - 

    tsc hello.ts

You will see that nothing happens when the command runs. It just runs and stops and that's it. No messages, no output, nothing. What happened?

Well, there were no type errors, so we didn’t get any output in our console since there was nothing to report.

But, if you see the folder in which you have this file, you will find a new file there with the same name but with ".js" at the end. 

That’s the output from our hello.ts file after tsc compiles or transforms it into a plain JavaScript file. 

We will see that the code is the same as in .ts file because there is nothing to transform. But normally, the compiler tries to emit clean readable code that looks like something a person would write. While that’s not always so easy, TypeScript indents consistently, is mindful of when our code spans across different lines of code, and tries to keep comments around.

Now, let's write a code which has some type errors.


    // This is an industrial-grade general-purpose greeter function:
    function greet(person, date) {
        console.log(`Hello ${person}, today is ${date}!`);
    }
    
    greet("Brendan");

Now, if we run "tsc hello.ts" in the terminal, we get an error that says - 

    Expected 2 arguments, but got 1.

And this makes sense because we call the 'greet()' method with only one argument, even though it needs two arguments.

But wait, something else happened!


# EMITTING WITH ERRORS

We see that the .js file also changed and it now has the code that we wrote in the .ts file, even though the code had type errors.

That might be a bit surprising given the fact that tsc reported an error about our code, but this is based on one of TypeScript’s core values: much of the time, you will know better than TypeScript.

To reiterate from earlier, type-checking code limits the sorts of programs you can run, and so there’s a tradeoff on what sorts of things a type-checker finds acceptable. Most of the time that’s okay, but there are scenarios where those checks get in the way. For example, imagine yourself migrating JavaScript code over to TypeScript and introducing type-checking errors. Eventually you’ll get around to cleaning things up for the type-checker, but that original JavaScript code was already working! Why should converting it over to TypeScript stop you from running it?

# noEmitOnError FLAG

So TypeScript doesn’t get in your way. Of course, over time, you may want to be a bit more defensive against mistakes, and make TypeScript act a bit more strictly. In that case, you can use the "noEmitOnError" compiler option. Try deleting the .js file and then run tsc with the below flag:

    tsc --noEmitOnError hello.ts

And now, you will see that the .js file is not generated at all! That's because we used the flag "noEmitOnError" which will not emit a .js file if there is a type error. Since we don't always need this type of checking, this compiler flag is not on by default.