So far, we have not explicitly written in our code what is the type of the variable. We have so far just let TypeScript find the type of the variable based on the value we assign to it. But usually, when we work with TypeScript, we specify the types when we declare variables, functions and more.

Let's say we have the below function in our code - 


    function greet(person, date) {
        console.log(`Hello ${person}, today is ${date.toDateString()}!`);
    }

We haven't told Typescript what is the type of "person" or what is the type of "date". To explicitly specify the types, we can add type annotations. For example, we want that "person" is a string and "date" is of type "Date". So, we can write - 

    function greet(person: string, date: Date) {
        console.log(`Hello ${person}, today is ${date.toDateString()}!`);
    }

What we did was add type annotations on person and date to describe what types of values greet can be called with. You can read that signature as ”greet takes a person of type string, and a date of type Date“.

With this, TypeScript can tell us about other cases where greet might have been called incorrectly. For example…

    greet("Maddison", Date());

Here, we will get an error saying "Argument of type 'string' is not assignable to parameter of type 'Date'."

That's because calling Date() returns a string but the second argument to greet() must be of type "Date", not of type "string". 

If we had not defined the type, then typescript would've assumed that the second argument is also a string because we are passing a string value for it. But then, it would've failed when we called "date.toDateString()" because a string does not have a function called "toDateString()". But this issue would not be visible while writing the code. We would've known about this issue when we run the code. 

So that's why, whenever possible, we should explicitly specify the types in TypeScript.

So, to fix the issue, we will pass a "Date" type instead of a "string" type in the greet() function when we call it.

    greet("Maddison", new Date());

Now when we run tsc <filename.ts>, the .js file that gets generated will not have the type annotations because javascript does not support them. 

Type annotations aren’t part of JavaScript (or ECMAScript to be pedantic), so there really aren’t any browsers or other runtimes that can just run TypeScript unmodified. That’s why TypeScript needs a compiler in the first place - it needs some way to strip out or transform any TypeScript-specific code so that you can run it. Most TypeScript-specific code gets erased away, and likewise, here our type annotations were completely erased.

So, always remember that Type annotations never change the runtime behavior of your program.

# DOWNLEVELING

Did you notice one more thing in the generated .js file? While in the .ts file we used template string (using backticks) - 

    `Hello ${person}, today is ${date.toDateString()}!`;

In the .js file, it was converted to -

    "Hello ".concat(person, ", today is ").concat(date.toDateString(), "!");

But why?

Template strings are a feature from a version of ECMAScript called ECMAScript 2015 (a.k.a. ECMAScript 6, ES2015, ES6, etc). 

TypeScript has the ability to rewrite code from newer versions of ECMAScript to older ones such as ECMAScript 3 or ECMAScript 5 (a.k.a. ES3 and ES5). This process of moving from a newer or “higher” version of ECMAScript down to an older or “lower” one is sometimes called downleveling.

By default TypeScript targets ES3, an extremely old version of ECMAScript. We could have chosen something a little bit more recent by using the target option. Running with --target es2015 changes TypeScript to target ECMAScript 2015, meaning code should be able to run wherever ECMAScript 2015 is supported. 

Let's run this command - 

    tsc --target es2015 <filename>.ts

So running tsc --target es2015 hello.ts gives us the following output in the .js file:

    `Hello ${person}, today is ${date.toDateString()}!`

And now both the ts and js files are using Template strings because now, we are targeting ESMAScript 2015.

While the default target is ES3, the great majority of current browsers support ES2015. Most developers can therefore safely specify ES2015 or above as a target, unless compatibility with certain ancient browsers is important.
