By default, types are optional in TypeScript. This means, even if you do not explicitly tell TypeScript what is the datatype, it won't throw any errors.

The reason why this is the default is because some people are looking for a more loose opt-in experience which can help validate only some parts of their program, and still have decent tooling. 

Since by default the types are optional, it also means that there is no checks made of potentially "null" or "undefined" values by default.

Why this is done so is because many developers will migrade their code from JavaScript to TypeScript. So, if the "null" or "undefined" checks are default, then the developer will have to deal with a lot of errors thrown by Typescript.

But, there are also users who want TypeScript to validate as much as it can straight away, and that's why, there is a strictness setting in Typescript.

These strictness settings turn static type-checking from a switch (either your code is checked or not) into something closer to a dial. The further you turn this dial up, the more TypeScript will check for you. This can require a little extra work, but generally speaking it pays for itself in the long run, and enables more thorough checks and more accurate tooling. When possible, a new codebase should always turn these strictness checks on.

TypeScript has several type-checking strictness flags that can be turned on or off.

If you use the "strict" flag in the CLI of set "strict" to true in the tsconfig.json file, then all those flags will be turned on. But, if you want a fine grain control, you can also opt out of those flags individually.

There are two most common flags that we should know - noImplicitAny and strictNullChecks.

# noImplicitAny

Before talking about this, we need to understand the type "any" in Typescript. We know that Typescript will automatically infer the type by default.

"any" is the most lenient type in typescript which simply means this particular variable can be of literally "any" type. This is like a workaround for the cases when we don't know what the type of a value will be. It allows you to assign a variable or function parameter to be of literally any type.

Whenever we do not annotate a variable with a type, TypeScripts tries to infer the type from its usage. When it cannot infer the type from its usage it infers the type as any.

However, using 'any' often defeats the purpose of using TypeScript in the first place. The more typed your program is, the more validation and tooling you’ll get, meaning you’ll run into fewer bugs as you code. Turning on the 'noImplicitAny' flag will issue an error on any variables whose type is implicitly inferred as any.

Let's take an example of a variable passed to a function.

    function greet(name) {
        console.log("Hello "+ name);
    }

If in our tsconfig.json file, "strict" is true or "noImplicitAny" is true, then the compiler will throw an error if we try to compile the above ts code into js. It will show an error saying - 

    Parameter 'name' implicitly has an 'any' type.

So, because of the "strict" or "noImplicitAny" flag, Typescript will throw an error because the type of the variable "name" is implicitly inferred as "any" since we did not explicitly provide the type.

It is worth mentioning that this flag is only for "Implict" any. This means, if we change the code to this - 

    function greet(name: any) {
        console.log("Hello "+ name);
    }

Then there will not be any error. Because this time, we are explicitly telling TypeScript that this variable "name" has a type "any".

So, this behavior should be the same for variable declaration right? Well, there is a catch here.

Let's say we have this code - 

    let userName;
    userName = "John"
    console.log("Hello" + userName)

Here, we declare the variable "userName" in the first line but we did not define it. This means, typescript is implicitly inferring the type of "userName" as "any". So, it should throw an error if the "noImplicitAny" flag is enabled, right?

But it is not throwing any error. Why?

That's because while iniitally the type is inferred as "any", Typescript is able to determine the type of the variable "userName" when we set it to a string "John" so at that point, Typescript infers the type as "string. And you can verify that if you console.log(typeof userName).

So, There is no type tied to the variable, but the compiler is able to infer it from the last value that was assigned. So, there is no type-safety problem here. That's why no error is thrown.

But in case of this code - 

    function greet(name) {
        console.log("Hello "+ name);
    }

When typescript goes over this function, it simply cannot find the actual type of "name". So, it implicitly infers it as "any".

And this is also the reason why, this function can be passed any value. For example, greet("John"), gree(10), greet(true). All these are valid.

# strictNullChecks

The second flag is the "strictNullChecks" flag.

By default, we can define variables with null or undefined values, even if their type is number, string etc. That is, By default, values like null and undefined are assignable to any other type.

This can make writing some code easier, but forgetting to handle null and undefined is the cause of countless bugs in the world.

The strictNullChecks flag makes handling null and undefined more explicit, and spares us from worrying about whether we forgot to handle null and undefined.

So, without this flag, the below code will run without any issues - 

    let userName: string = undefined;
    console.log(userName)

But, if we turn this flag on inside tsconfig.json, we will get an error - 

    Type 'undefined' is not assignable to type 'string'.

And that's how this flag works.