Generics are really useful but they can be overused. In some cases, you might find yourself writing a generic function or type that doesn't actually need to be generic. This can make your code more complicated than it needs to be and can also make it harder for other developers to understand.

Let's say we have -

    const returnBothOfWhatIPassIn = <T1,T2>(params: {
        a: T1;
        b: T2;
    }): [T1, T2] => {
        return [params.a, params.b];
    };

Here, we have a function that takes in an object with two properties, 'a' and 'b', and returns a tuple containing those two properties. We have two generic type parameters, T1 and T2, which represent the types of 'a' and 'b' respectively.

Now, instead of having two generic type parameters, we can simplify this function by using a single generic type parameter that extends an object with 'a' and 'b' properties. This way, we can avoid the unnecessary complexity of having two separate type parameters -

    const returnBothOfWhatIPassIn =
        <T extends { a: unknown, b: unknown }>(params: T): [T['a'], T['b']] => {
            return [params.a, params.b];
        };

So here, we have a single generic type parameter T that extends an object with 'a' and 'b' properties. We can then use T['a'] and T['b'] to access the types of 'a' and 'b' respectively. This makes our code simpler and easier to understand while still achieving the same functionality.

Now, of course you can argue that the previous version with two generic type parameters is more readable and cleaner than this version with a single generic type parameter. And that's a valid point.

However, in this case, the single generic type parameter version is more concise and still conveys the same information without the need for two separate type parameters.

It is a good idea to always try to reduce the number of generic type parameters in your code whenever possible. This can help make your code more readable and easier to understand for other developers who may be working with your code in the future.

In the end, the key is to strike a balance between using generics to make your code flexible and reusable, while also avoiding unnecessary complexity that can make your code harder to understand.

If you have more generic type parameters than you actually need, it can be a little messy to read and understand your code. So, it's always a good idea to review your code and see if there are any generic type parameters that can be simplified or removed altogether.