In the last section, we learned about the Typescript's global scope and how can we use 'declare global' to add new types to the global scope.

Now, a lot of time, we want to add new functionality to existing global interfaces.

For example, we know that we have the 'window' object in the global scope, and it has a lot of properties and methods. But what if we want to add a new method to the 'window' object?

Let's say we attach a new function to the 'window' object -

    window.makeGreeting = () => 'Hello!';

Now, this is a valid code in JavaScript, but TypeScript will throw an error because it doesn't know about the 'makeGreeting' method on the 'window' object.

We have to manually tell TypeScript that we have added a new method to the 'window' object.

Since 'window' is a global object, how can we modify its type definition to include our new method?

Well, let's first try to see what even is this 'window' in TypeScript's perspective. If we ctrl + click on 'window', we can see -

    declare var window: Window & typeof globalThis;

So, this 'window' is of type 'Window' and also has all the properties of 'globalThis'.

This meaning, whatever the 'globalThis' has, 'window' also has it. And 'globalThis' is the global scope in TypeScript. We know that we can alter the global scope using 'declare global', so we can use that to add our new method to the 'window' object -

    declare global {
        function makeGreeting(): string;
    }

This will work here because 'window' has all the properties of 'globalThis', and we have added our new method to the global scope.

But still, this is not the best way to do it because we are adding a new method to the global scope, which can lead to conflicts with other libraries or code that might also be adding a method with the same name.

We specifically want to add this method to the 'window' object, not to the global scope.

So, the next thing we can try to alter is the 'Window' interface because that is the type of the 'window' object. If we can add our new method to the 'Window' interface, then it will be available on the 'window' object without affecting the global scope.

Now, here is where our knowledge of interfaces and how they can be extended comes into play. We can use declaration merging to add our new method to the 'Window' interface.

Remember that we can declare an interface with the same name as an existing interface, and TypeScript will merge them together. So, we can declare a new interface with the same name 'Window' and add our new method to it -

    interface Window {
        makeGreeting(): string;
    }

And this is what we need to put inside 'declare global' because we want to modify the global 'Window' interface -

    declare global {
        interface Window {
            makeGreeting(): string;
        }
    }

Now, there is one thing to note about 'declare global'.

Inside a declaration file (d.ts) in TypeScript, whatever you put, they are automatically put in the global scope. So, you don't actually need to wrap it inside 'declare global' if you are writing this in a declaration file.

If we have let's say a file named 'index.d.ts', we can directly write -

    interface Window {
        makeGreeting(): string;
    }

And this will work because everything in a declaration file is automatically in the global scope.