Let's say we have -

    process.env.MY_ENV_VAR = "Hello World!";

Here, we are adding a new property 'MY_ENV_VAR' to the 'process.env' object.

Now, how do we add this 'MY_ENV_VAR' property to the type definition of 'process.env' so that TypeScript recognizes it?

Well, we already saw in the last section how we can use declaration merging to add new properties to existing interfaces.

Can we do the same here?

For that, we need to see how 'process' is defined in the type definitions.

If you ctrl + click the 'process' object in your code, you will see that it is defined in the 'node' type definitions -

    declare var process: NodeJS.Process;

So, 'process' is a variable of type 'NodeJS.Process'.

What is this 'NodeJS'?

It looks like this is a 'namespace' -

    declare namespace NodeJS {...}

And inside this namespace, we have the 'Process' interface defined -

    interface Process extends EventEmitter {...}

The 'env' property is defined inside the 'Process' interface -

    env: ProcessEnv;

And it is of type 'ProcessEnv' -

    interface ProcessEnv extends Dict<string> {}

Basically, we have this -

    namespace NodeJS {
        interface Process extends EventEmitter {
            env: ProcessEnv;
            ...
        }
        interface ProcessEnv extends Dict<string> {}
    }

So, what if we use declaration merging to add our 'MY_ENV_VAR' property to the 'ProcessEnv' interface -

    declare global {
        interface ProcessEnv {
            MY_ENV_VAR: string;
        }
    }

Well, it will not work.

Now, here is something to keep in mind about 'namespaces' in TypeScript.

When we have a 'namespace', it creates a new scope for the types defined inside it. So, when we try to use declaration merging to add a new property to an interface defined inside a namespace, we need to make sure that we are adding it to the correct namespace.

In our case, we need to add our new property to the 'NodeJS' namespace, not the global namespace. So, we need to do this -

    declare global {
        namespace NodeJS {
            interface ProcessEnv {
                MY_ENV_VAR: string;
            }
        }
    }

What this does is that it merges our new property 'MY_ENV_VAR' into the existing 'ProcessEnv' interface defined inside the 'NodeJS' namespace.

The benefit of namespaces is that they help us organize our types and avoid naming conflicts. So, when we have a large codebase with many types, using namespaces can help us keep things organized and prevent naming collisions. It is possible that two different libraries might have an interface with the same name, and if we were to merge our new property into the global namespace, it could potentially cause a naming conflict. By using namespaces, we can avoid this issue and keep our types organized.