Let's see how we can use Type Predicates with classes.

Suppose we have a class 'Form' -

    class Form<TValues> {
        error?: string;

        constructor(
            public values: TValues,
            private validate: (values: TValues) => string | void
        ) {}

        isInvalid() {
            const result = this.validate(this.values);

            if (typeof result === 'string') {
                this.error = result;
                return true;
            }

            this.error = undefined;
            return false;
        }
    }

This is a generic class that takes a type parameter 'TValues'. It has a method 'isInvalid' that checks if the form values are valid based on the provided validation function.

Let's say we create a new instance -

    const form = new Form(
        {
            username: "",
            password: ""
        },
        (values) => {
            if (!values.username) {
                return "Username is required";
            }

            if (!values.password) {
                return "Password is required";
            }
        }
    );

Now, if we say -

    if (form.isInvalid()) {
        console.error(form.error);
    } else {
        console.log("Form is valid", form.error);
    }

What do you think would be the type of 'form.error' inside the 'if' block and the 'else' block?

Inside the 'if' block, ideally, it should be of type 'string' because we set it to the error message. However, TypeScript does not know that and it still considers it as 'string | undefined'.

So, how do we tell TypeScript that if 'isInvalid' returns true, then 'error' is definitely a string? TypeScript is not able to infer that from the code, but we know that whenever 'isInvalid' returns true, 'error' will be a string. 

This is a good place to use a Type Predicate.

But, the issue is.... how do we use it?

We know that we can use a Type Predicate using this syntax -

    function isString(value: any): value is string {
        // Any logic to determine if value is a string and return true or false
    }

But in our case, there is no input parameter to the 'isInvalid' method that we can use for the Type Predicate. So, what do we do?

Well, we do have access to 'this' which is the instance of the class. So, we can use 'this' in our Type Predicate.

If 'isInvalid' returns true, we know that 'this.error' would be a string. So, we can write our Type Predicate like this -

    isInvalid(): this is Form<TValues> & { error: string }  {...}

Woah! What did we just do here?

Well, we are simply telling TypeScript that if 'isInvalid' returns true, then 'this' is of type 'Form<TValues>' and it has an 'error' property which is a string. We use '&' to combine the types, it means that 'this' will have all the properties of 'Form<TValues>' and also an 'error' property which is a string.

There is an even weirder way to write this, we can also write it like this -

    isInvalid(): this is this & { error: string }  {...}

Yep, it looks weird but it is valid TypeScript. Here, we are saying that 'this' is of type 'this' (which is the instance of the class) and it has an 'error' property which is a string.

BTW I just noticed that we can even do this and TypeScript will be fine with this -

    isInvalid(): this is { error: string }  {...}

So here, we are just saying that 'this' has an 'error' property which is a string. TypeScript will still understand that 'this' is of type 'Form<TValues>' because it is the instance of the class, and it will also understand that 'error' is a string when 'isInvalid' returns true.

So, this line above does not mean that 'this' is only of type '{ error: string }', it means that 'this' is of type 'Form<TValues>' and it has an 'error' property which is a string.

Quite an interesting way to use Type Predicates, right? It allows us to tell TypeScript about the state of our class instance based on the return value of a method.