In the last section, we looked at how we can use Type Predicates with Classes.

Now, let's do the same with Assertion Functions.

Suppose we have -

    interface User {
        id: string;
    }

    export class SDK {
        loggedInUser?: User;

        constructor(loggedInUser?: User) {
            this.loggedInUser = loggedInUser;
        }

        assertIsLoggedIn() {
            if (!this.loggedInUser) {
                throw new Error('User is not logged in');
            }
        }

        createPost (title: string, body: string){
            console.log(this.loggedInUser)

            this.assertIsLoggedIn();

            console.log(this.loggedInUser.id); // ERROR
        }
    }

Here, we have a class 'SDK' that has an optional property 'loggedInUser'. The method 'assertIsLoggedIn' is an assertion function that checks if 'loggedInUser' is defined. If it's not, it throws an error.

The issue right now is that TypeScript does not understand that after calling 'assertIsLoggedIn', 'loggedInUser' is guaranteed to be defined. Therefore, when we try to access 'this.loggedInUser' after calling 'assertIsLoggedIn', TypeScript still considers it as possibly undefined. That's why it gives an error when we try to access 'this.loggedInUser.id'.

We know that after calling 'assertIsLoggedIn', 'loggedInUser' will be defined, but TypeScript does not have that information. So, we can use an Assertion Function syntax to tell TypeScript that after calling 'assertIsLoggedIn', 'loggedInUser' is indeed defined.

Just like Type Predicates, the syntax is quite funky here for classes. We need to use 'this is' syntax to tell TypeScript that after calling 'assertIsLoggedIn', 'this' (the instance of the class) has a certain type -

    assertIsLoggedIn(): asserts this is SDK & { loggedInUser: User } {
        if (!this.loggedInUser) {
            throw new Error('User is not logged in');
        }
    }

As we already saw in the last section, we can also do -

    assertIsLoggedIn(): asserts this is this & { loggedInUser: User } {
        if (!this.loggedInUser) {
            throw new Error('User is not logged in');
        }
    }

And to make it simpler we can even do -

    assertIsLoggedIn(): asserts this is { loggedInUser: User } {
        if (!this.loggedInUser) {
            throw new Error('User is not logged in');
        }
    }

So here, we are telling TypeScript that after calling 'assertIsLoggedIn', 'this' will have a property 'loggedInUser' of type 'User'. This way, when we call 'assertIsLoggedIn' before accessing 'this.loggedInUser.id', TypeScript will understand that 'loggedInUser' is defined and has the type 'User', allowing us to access its properties without any errors.