In the previous section, we learnt the difference between nominal and structural typing. We also saw that TypeScript uses structural typing, which means that two types are considered compatible if they have the same structure, regardless of their names.

Now, there is something called 'branded type', which is a technique to create (sort of) nominal types in TypeScript. A branded type is a type that has a unique property that distinguishes it from other types, even if they have the same structure.

To create a branded type, we typically "intersect" the base type with an object and that object contains a "unique" property. This unique property is often a unique symbol and this ensures that the branded type is distinct from other types, even if they have the same structure.

So, let's create a helper type that will turn a base type into a branded type. We can call this helper type 'Branded' -

    declare const __brand: unique symbol;
    type Branded<T, TBrand> = T & { [__brand]: TBrand };

So, what is going on here? The 'Branded' type takes two type parameters - 'T', which is the base type, and 'TBrand', which is the unique brand. The resulting type is an intersection of 'T' and an object that has a property with a unique symbol as its key and 'TBrand' as its value.

So, we can use it like this -

    type Password = Branded<string, "Password">;
    type Email = Branded<string, "Email">;

Here, we created two branded types - 'Password' and 'Email'. Both of these types are based on 'string', but they are distinct types because they have different brands.

Now, let's create a variable of type 'Password' -

    const password = "myPassword123" as Password;

Now, this 'password' variable is of type 'Password', which means it has the structure of a string, but it is also branded as a 'Password'. This means that we cannot assign a regular string to a variable of type 'Password' without explicitly asserting it as a 'Password'.

This is similar to how nominal typing works in other languages, where types are considered distinct based on their names rather than their structure. By using branded types, we can achieve a similar level of type safety in TypeScript, even though it is structurally typed.

So, now, if we try to do something like this -

    let passwordSlot: Password;
    passwordSlot = password; // OK
    passwordSlot = "myPassword123"; // Error: Type 'string' is not assignable to type 'Password'

Note that all of this is happening only on the type level. At runtime, 'Password' and 'Email' are just strings. The branding is purely a compile-time construct that helps us catch type errors and enforce type safety in our code.

Now, let's say we have a function that verifies the password -

    function verifyPassword(password: Password): boolean {
        // Some logic to verify the password
    }

Here, we take a 'Password' as an argument, which means that we can only pass variables of type 'Password' to this function. This helps us ensure that we are not accidentally passing a regular string to the function, which could lead to bugs or security issues.

So, we cannot call this function with a regular string -

    verifyPassword("myPassword123"); // Error: Argument of type 'string' is not assignable to parameter of type 'Password'

Either we have to pass a variable of type 'Password' or we have to assert the string as a 'Password' -

    const myPassword: Password = "myPassword123" as Password;
    verifyPassword(myPassword); // OK

    verifyPassword("myPassword123" as Password); // OK

Here, the benefit is that just by looking at the code, we can immediately see that 'myPassword' is of type 'Password', which gives us a clear indication of its intended use and helps prevent accidental misuse of regular strings where a 'Password' is expected.

And all of this is not limited to just primitive types. We can create branded types for more complex structures as well. For example, we could create a branded type for an object -

    type UserObject = Branded<{
        id: string,
        name: string
    },"User">;

    const user = {
        id: "123",
        name: "John Doe"
    } as UserObject;

Here, we created a branded type 'UserObject' which is an object with 'id' and 'name' properties, and we branded it as 'User'. This means that we can only assign objects that have the structure of 'UserObject' and are branded as 'User' to variables of type 'UserObject'.