Here is another nice use of Branded Types.

Let's say we have an interface -

    interface PasswordValues {
        password: string;
        confirmPassword: string;
    }

This interface is used to capture the password and confirm password values from a form.

Suppose, we have these functions -

    type Valid<T> = unknown;

    const validatePassword = (values: PasswordValues) => {
        if (values.password !== values.confirmPassword) {
            throw new Error('Passwords do not match');
        }
        return values;
    };

    const createUserOnApi = (values: Valid<PasswordValues>) => { 
        // Imagine this function creates a user on an API
    };


We want to make sure that the 'createUserOnApi' function can only be called with valid password values. We can achieve this by using Branded Types.

We cannot alter the interface here because it is being used in multiple places.

So, we can create a Type Helper named 'Valid' that takes an object type and returns a branded version of that type. 

Well, we can do that by -

    type Valid<T> = Branded<T, 'valid'>;

Here, we are creating a branded version of the type 'T' with the brand 'valid'.

And now, we can update the 'validatePassword' function to return a branded version of the 'PasswordValues' type -

    const validatePassword = (values: PasswordValues) => {
        if (values.password !== values.confirmPassword) {
            throw new Error('Passwords do not match');
        }
        return values as Valid<PasswordValues>;
    };

This means, if the validations are successful, we are returning the values as a branded version of the 'PasswordValues' type.

And since the 'createUserOnApi' function is accepting a branded version of the 'PasswordValues' type, we can only call it with the values returned from the 'validatePassword' function. This way, we can ensure that the 'createUserOnApi' function is only called with valid password values.

So, we have to validate the password values before we can create a user on the API. This is a great way to ensure that our functions are only called with valid data and it helps us catch errors at compile time rather than at runtime.