Alright, let's take a little bit more complex code to see how Branded Types can be really helpful.

Suppose, we have an interface 'User' -

    interface User {
        id: string;
        name: string;
        maxConversionAmount: number;
    }

We have three methods -

    const getConversionRateFromApi = async(
        amount: number,
        from: string,
        to: string
    ) => {
        return Promise.resolve(amount & 0.82);
    };

    const ensureUserCanConvert = (user: User, amount: number) => {
        if (user.maxConversionAmount < amount) {
            throw new Error('User is not authorized to convert this amount');
        }

        return user;
    };

    const performConversion = async (
        user: User,
        to: string,
        amount: number
    ) => {
        // Some logic to perform the conversion
    };

Let's just assume it is some sort of a finance-related app. The 'performConversion' method is responsible for performing the conversion.It takes a user, the target currency, and the amount to be converted.

The 'ensureUserCanConvert' method checks if the user is authorized to convert the specified amount.

The 'getConversionRateFromApi' method is responsible for fetching the conversion rate from an external API.

Now, we have a function that calls all of these in order -

    const handleConversionRequest = async (
        user: User,
        from: string,
        to: string,
        amount: number
    ) => {
        const convertedAmount = await getConversionRateFromApi(amount, from ,to);
        
        const authorizedUser = ensureUserCanConvert(user, convertedAmount);

        await performConversion(authorizedUser, to, convertedAmount);
    };

The thing is, we cannot skip any one method call. All of these have to be in order, one after the other. So at the end, 'performConversion' should only be called with the converted amount and the authorized user.

This is a good place to use Branded Types.

We know that we have to call 'convertedAmount' first before any other method. So, we can ensure that the 'convertedAmount' returned a Branded Type which is then passed to the next method. This way, we can create a validation boundary and ensure that the methods are called in the correct order.

Let's create some branded types for the converted amount and the authorized user -

    type ConvertedAmount = Branded<number, 'ConvertedAmount'>;
    type AuthorizedUser = Branded<User, 'AuthorizedUser'>;

And now, it is time to update the methods. 

The first method is the 'getConversionRateFromApi' method. We know that what is returns should be of type 'ConvertedAmount'. So, we can update it like this -

    const getConversionRateFromApi = async(
        amount: number,
        from: string,
        to: string
    ) => {
        return Promise.resolve((amount * 0.82) as ConvertedAmount);
    };

There are various ways to add the return type. You could've also done -

    return Promise.resolve(amount * 0.82) as Promise<ConvertedAmount>;

Next up, we have the 'ensureUserCanConvert' method which takes a user and the converted amount as inputs. We know that when we call this method, we should already have the converted amount with us. This means, the type of the 'convertedAmount' parameter should not be a 'number' but rather 'ConvertedAmount'. Also, we know that this method returns an 'AuthorizedUser'. So, we can update the method like this -

    const ensureUserCanConvert = (user: User, amount: ConvertedAmount) => {
        if (user.maxConversionAmount < amount) {
            throw new Error('User is not authorized to convert this amount');
        }

        return user as AuthorizedUser;
    };

And finally, we have the 'performConversion' method. We know that this method should only be called with an 'AuthorizedUser' and a 'ConvertedAmount'. So, we can update it like this -

    const performConversion = async (
        user: AuthorizedUser,
        to: string,
        amount: ConvertedAmount
    ) => {
        // Some logic to perform the conversion
    };

And that's it!

Now, if we try to call the 'performConversion' method without calling the previous methods, we will get a type error. This is because the 'performConversion' method expects an 'AuthorizedUser' and a 'ConvertedAmount', and we cannot just pass any 'User' or 'number' to it.

This is such a brilliant way to create validation boundaries in our code and ensure that the methods are called in the correct order. It also makes our code more type-safe and less prone to errors. This shows how we can have logic on the type level in TypeScript using Branded Types.