Let's say we have an index.ts file with a simple function -

    function greet(name: string) {
        return `Hello, ${name}!`;
    }

    console.log(greet('John'));

If you try to use this file directly in your html like this -

    <script src="index.ts"></script>

You will definitely get an error because browsers do not understand TypeScript. They only understand JavaScript.

So, how do we convert this TypeScript code into JavaScript?

Well, first, you need to have TypeScript installed. You can do this using npm:

    npm install -g typescript

This will install TypeScript globally on your machine.

And now, we can use the TypeScript compiler to convert our TypeScript file into JavaScript. To do this, run the following command in your terminal (while you are in the directory where your index.ts file is located): : 

    tsc

And now, you will see a new file named index.js in the same directory. This file contains the JavaScript version of your TypeScript code.

And that's how you can convert TypeScript into JavaScript!

Now, this JavaScript file can be used in your HTML like this:

    <script src="index.js"></script>

And now, there won't be any errors, and you will see "Hello, John!" printed in the console when you open your HTML file in a browser.

If you look at the JavaScript file (index.js), it will look something like this:

    function greet(name) {
        return "Hello, ".concat(name, "!");
    }
    console.log(greet('John'));

If you notice, there is no ": string" in the function parameter. This is because TypeScript's type annotations are removed during the compilation process, as JavaScript does not support types.

# THE TSCONFIG FILE

What if we want to configure the TypeScript compiler to generate JavaScript files with specific settings?

Because so far, we have been using the TypeScript compiler with default settings. But sometimes, we might want to change how the TypeScript code is compiled into JavaScript.

We have something called a 'tsconfig.json' file that allows us to configure the TypeScript compiler.

Whenever we run a command like 'tsc', the TypeScript compiler looks for a file named 'tsconfig.json' in the current directory. If it finds this file, it uses the settings defined in it to compile the TypeScript code.

If it doesn't find this file, it uses the default settings.

To generate one, we have to run the following command in the terminal:

    tsc --init

Once this command is executed, a 'tsconfig.json' file will be created in the current directory. You will see that this file has some properties defined like this -

    target: es2016
    module: commonjs
    strict: true
    esModuleInterop: true
    skipLibCheck: true
    forceConsistentCasingInFileNames: true

There might also be some other properties that are commented out. You can uncomment and modify them as per your requirements.

It won't be feasible to explain all the properties here, but here is a brief overview of above ones -

    - target: JS version output (ES3, ES5, ES6, ES2020…)
    - module: Module system (commonjs, esnext…)
    - strict: Enable all strict type checks
    - esModuleInterop: Interop with CommonJS modules
    - skipLibCheck: When set to true, it skips type checking of declaration files.
    - forceConsistentCasingInFileNames: This ensures that file names are treated as case-sensitive.

So, when we make a change in our TypeScript code and want to compile it again, we can simply run the command:

    tsc

But, does this mean, every time we make a change, we have to run this command manually?

Well, there is a better way out there. It is to use the 'watch' mode of the TypeScript compiler. We can run the above command with the '--watch' flag like this:

    tsc --watch

Now, whenever we make a change in our TypeScript file and save it, the TypeScript compiler will automatically compile it into JavaScript without us having to run the command again and again.

What if we do not want the newly cerated JavaScript file to be in the same directory as our TypeScript file? We may want to have all the JavaScript files in a separate directory, say 'dist'. How to do that?

Again, the 'tsconfig.json' file comes to the rescue. We can specify the output directory for the compiled JavaScript files by adding a property called 'outDir' in the 'tsconfig.json' file like this:


    {
        "compilerOptions": {
            "outDir": "./dist"
        }
    }

Now, when we run the TypeScript compiler, it will create the JavaScript files in the 'dist' directory instead of the current directory.