Let's say we have these two types -

    type UserPart = {
        id: string;
        name: string;
        age: number;
    }

    type UserPart2 = {
        id: number;
        phone: string;
    }

What if we try to create a new type which is a combination of these two types?

    type User = UserPart & UserPart2;

Well, so far, there is no issue.

Let's try to create a new object of type 'User'.

    const user: User = {
        id: "123", <- ERROR
        name: "John Doe",
        age: 30,
        phone: "555-1234"
    }

We will see an error in the IDE for the 'id' property. The error will say -

    Type 'string' is not assignable to type 'never'

So, somehow, the type of 'id' here is 'never'.

That's because in 'UserPart' type, we have 'id' as a string, while in UserPart2 type, we have 'id' as a number. When we create the User type by combining these two, TypeScript sees a conflict and resolves the type of 'id' to 'never', which is the type that represents values that never occur.

Another problem is that the error did not come when we created the User type, but rather when we tried to create an object of that type. This is not a good user experience because it can lead to confusion and frustration.

Well, the best way to solve this problem is not to use 'Type' here at all. We can use 'Interfaces' instead. Let's see what happens when we use interfaces -

    interface UserPart {
        id: string;
        name: string;
        age: number;
    }

    interface UserPart2 {
        id: number;
        phone: string;
    }

    type User = UserPart & UserPart2;

Well, this still does not solve the problem because we still get the error at the same place, that is, when we create a new object of type 'User'. The reason is that we are still creating 'User' as a 'type', not an 'interface'. Let's convert it to an interface and see what happens -

    interface User extends UserPart, UserPart2

In this case, as soon as we create a new interface 'User' that extends both 'UserPart' and 'UserPart2', TypeScript will give us an error -

    Interface 'User' cannot simultaneously extend types 'UserPart' and 'UserPart2'.
        Named property 'id' of types 'UserPart' and 'UserPart2' are not identical

This error clearly tells us that while 'User' extends both 'UserPart' and 'UserPart2' interfaces, there is a property named 'id' in both these interfaces with different types. So, it is not possible for the 'User' type to simultaneously extend both interfaces. This is a better user experience than the previous one because it provides immediate feedback about the conflicting properties.

So, it shows that when we use interfaces, TypeScript is able to catch these kinds of errors at the time of interface declaration, rather than at the time of object creation. This makes it easier for developers to understand and fix the issues in their code.