Let's say we have an interface -

    interface Product {
        id: number;
        name: string;
        price: number;
        description: string;
    }

And we have a method that updates the product -

    const updateProduct = (id: number, productInfo: Omit<Product, 'id'>) => {
        // Update product logic here
    }

We have the 'Omit' utility type in action here. It allows us to create a new type by picking all properties from an existing type except for the ones we want to exclude. In this case, we're excluding the 'id' property from the 'Product' type.

But, now we have a requirement that we should be able to call the updateProduct function in such a way that we can pass productInfo which might only have partial  properties of the Product type. 

That is, we should be able to call it like -

    updateProduct(1, { name: 'Updated Product', price: 19.99 });

    Or

    updateProduct(1, { description: 'Updated Description' });

    Or

    updateProduct(1, {price: 19.99});

And so on. Right now, it will throw an error for all these calls because we are not providing all the properties.

We want to make the properties in type 'Omit<Product, 'id'>' as optional.

Well, one way would be to manually create a type like this:

    type partialProduct = {
        name?: string;
        price?: number;
        description?: string;
    }

And now, we will be able to call the updateProduct function with partial product information.

But, there is a cleaner way and that's to use yet another built-in Utility Type in TypeScript.

# PARTIAL

There is a utility type called 'Partial' in TypeScript which can make all properties of a type optional. That is exactly what we need here.

Its syntax is simply -

    Partial<Type>

It creates a new type which has all the properties of 'Type' but they are set to optional. So, all we need to do is wrap our 'Omit' inside a 'Partial' -

    const updateProduct = (id: number, productInfo: Partial<Omit<Product, 'id'>>) => {
        // Update product logic here
    }

Now, we are saying that whatever type is returned from 'Omit<Product, 'id'>' will be passed as the type to 'Partial', and then 'Partial' will make all its properties set to optional.

Behind the scenes, TypeScript does this -

    type Partial<T> = { [P in keyof T]?: T[P] | undefined; }

So, when we pass some type 'T' to 'Partial', it will iterate over all the keys and then it will simply set them to optional by using a question mark.