We already know what a 'tsconfig.json' file is and how it is used to configure a TypeScript project.

It is a file that contains various compiler options and settings that dictate how the TypeScript compiler (tsc) should process the code in the project. Now, what should be a good base configuration for a TypeScript project?

Well, here is a pretty good base config to begin with -

    {
        "compilerOptions": {
            /* Base Options */
            "skipLibCheck": true,
            "target": "es2022",
            "esModuleInterop": true,
            "allowJs": true,
            "resolveJsonModule": true,
            "moduleDetection": "force",
            "isolatedModules": true,
            "verbatimModuleSyntax": true,
            /* Strictness */
            "strict": true,
            "noUncheckedIndexedAccess": true,
            "noImplicitOverride": true,
            /* If transpiling with TypeScript */
            "module": "nodenext",
            "outDir": "dist",
            "sourceMap": true,
            /* If you're building for a library */
            "declaration": true,
            /* If you're building for a library in a monorepo */
            "composite": true,
            "declarationMap": true,
            /* If not transpiling with TypeScript */
            // "module": "preserve",
            // "noEmit": true
            /* If your code runs in the DOM */
            "lib": ["es2022", "dom","dom.iterable" ]
            /* If your code does not run in the DOM */
            // "lib": ["es2022"]
        }
    }

We know a lot of options already as previous sections covered them. Still, let's go over each one quickly.

1. "skipLibCheck": true - Skips type checking of declaration files (.d.ts) to speed up the compilation process.
2. "target": "es2022" - Specifies the ECMAScript target version for the emitted JavaScript code.
3. "esModuleInterop": true - Enables compatibility between CommonJS and ES Modules.
4. "allowJs": true - Allows JavaScript files to be compiled alongside TypeScript files.
5. "resolveJsonModule": true - Allows importing JSON files as modules.
6. "moduleDetection": "force" - Forces TypeScript to treat all files as modules.
7. "isolatedModules": true - Setting the isolatedModules flag tells TypeScript to warn you if you write certain code that can’t be correctly interpreted by a single-file transpilation process.
8. "verbatimModuleSyntax": true - Ensures that TypeScript preserves the module syntax as written in the source files.
9. "strict": true - Enables all strict type-checking options.
10. "noUncheckedIndexedAccess": true - Adds undefined to the type of indexed access when accessing properties via an index.
11. "noImplicitOverride": true - Ensures that methods in derived classes explicitly use the 'override' keyword.
12. "module": "nodenext" - It basically tells typescript to emulate the behavior of Node.js when dealing module code.
13. "outDir": "dist" - Specifies the output directory for the compiled JavaScript
14. "sourceMap": true - Generates source map files for debugging.
15. "declaration": true - Generates corresponding '.d.ts' declaration files.
16. "composite": true - Setting "composite": true in a TypeScript project's tsconfig.json file designates that project as a composite project, enabling it to be referenced by other TypeScript projects. This setting is crucial for enabling features like project references and incremental builds.
17. "module": "preserve" - This option tells the TypeScript compiler to keep the module syntax as is in the output files. This is useful when you want to use a separate bundler or module loader to handle the modules.
18. "noEmit": true - This option tells the TypeScript compiler not to emit any output files. This is useful when you only want to perform type checking without generating JavaScript files.
19. "lib": ["es2022", "dom","dom.iterable" ] - Specifies the library files to be included in the compilation. Here, it includes ECMAScript 2022 features and DOM-related APIs.
20. "lib": ["es2022"] - Specifies the library files to be included in the compilation. Here, it includes only ECMAScript 2022 features.

So, these are some of the recommended base configurations for a TypeScript project. You can always modify and extend this configuration based on your project's specific needs and requirements.

We will go over some of these in detail in the upcoming sections.