TypeScript is all about Types. But from where do these types even come? We can say there are three main sources of the types.

1. The 'lib' folder in TypeScript - If you look at the 'typescript' package in your 'node_modules', you will find a 'lib' folder. This folder contains all the built-in type definitions for JavaScript. Now, the actual 'lib.d.ts' file used depends on the 'target' you have set in your 'tsconfig.json' file. For example, if you have set the target to 'es5', then the 'lib.d.ts' file that will be used in your project is the one that corresponds to 'es5'. Similarly, if you have set the target to 'es2016', then the 'lib.d.ts' file that will be used in your project is the one that corresponds to 'es6'. Also, if you look at the 'lib.es2016.d.ts' file, it also references the 'es2015' files, which means that all the types from 'es2015' are also included in 'es2016'. And the same is the case with each subsequent version of ECMAScript. So, if you set the target to 'es2020', then you will have access to all the types from 'es5', 'es6', 'es2015', 'es2016', 'es2017', 'es2018', 'es2019' and 'es2020'.

Similarly, you will also find the 'DOM' types in the 'lib.dom.d.ts' file. These types are automatically included in your TypeScript projects, so you can use them without any additional setup.

2. DefinitelyTyped - This is a community-driven project that provides type definitions for popular JavaScript libraries. You can find these type definitions on the DefinitelyTyped GitHub repository. To use these types in your project, you can install them using npm with the '@types' prefix. For example, if you want to use the 'lodash' library, you can install its type definitions with the command 'npm install @types/lodash'.

3. Types in your own codebase or packages you use - Finally, you can also define your own types in your codebase. Also, a lot of time, the packages that you use in your project already ship with built-in type definitions. For example, if you install the 'angular' packages, they comes with their own type definitions. You can actually check if a package has built-in type definitions by looking at its npm page. You will notice a little 'ts' icon on the right side of the package name which indicates that the package has built-in type definitions.

If instead of 'ts', you see 'dt' icon then it means that the package relies on the 'DefinitelyTyped' repository for its type definitions. If you see neither of these icons, it means that the package does not have any type definitions available.