Sometimes, when we are using some external library of package, we have to extend its types for our own use case. So, how do we do that?

Let's say we have some external library that has a 'fetchUser' function -

    export const fetchUser = async (id: string) => {
        return {
            id,
            firstName: 'John',
            lastName: 'Doe',
        };
    };

And we are using it in our own code - 

    import { fetchUser } from "./fake-external-lib";

    type ParametersOfFetchUser = unknown;
    type ReturnTypeOfFetchUserWithFullName = unknown;

    export const fetchUserWithFullName = async(
        ...args: ParametersOfFetchUser
    ): Promise<ReturnTypeOfFetchUserWithFullName> => {
        const user = await fetchUser(...args);

        return {
            ...user,
            fullName: `${user.firstName} ${user.lastName}`,
        };
    }

So here, basically, what we are doing is we are creating a new function 'fetchUserWithFullName' that is using the 'fetchUser' function from the external library. But we want to extend the return type of 'fetchUser' to include a new property 'fullName'.

Now, our external library does not export any types, so we cannot directly import the types from the library. So, how do we extract the types from the 'fetchUser' function and use them in our own code?

Of course you can also say that why not just make our own types and use them in our code, but that would be a bad idea because if the external library changes the return type of 'fetchUser' function, then we would have to manually update our own types as well, which can be a tedious task.

Now, we know that we can use the 'Parameters' utility type in TypeScript to get the parameter types of a function and the 'ReturnType' utility type to get the return type of a function. So, we can use these utility types to extract the types from the 'fetchUser' function and use them in our own code.

    type ParametersOfFetchUser = Parameters<typeof fetchUser>;

Here, we are using the 'typeof' operator to get the type of the 'fetchUser' function and then we are passing that type to the 'Parameters' utility type to get the parameter types of the 'fetchUser' function.

This means, the type 'ParametersOfFetchUser' will now be a tuple type that represents the parameter types of the 'fetchUser' function. In this case, it will be a tuple type with a single element of type 'string', because the 'fetchUser' function takes a single parameter of type 'string'.

In case of the Return Type, we not only want to extract the return type of the 'fetchUser' function, but we also want to extend it to include a new property 'fullName'. So, we can use the 'ReturnType' utility type to get the return type of the 'fetchUser' function and then we can use an intersection type to extend it with the new property.

    type ReturnTypeOfFetchUserWithFullName = ReturnType<typeof fetchUser> & {
        fullName: string;
    };

But this does not work... But why?

Well, if you take a look at what 'ReturnType<typeof fetchUser>' is, it is actually a 'Promise' type that resolves to the return type of the 'fetchUser' function. So, we cannot directly use an intersection type to extend it with the new property 'fullName' because we are trying to intersect a Promise type with an object type, which is not allowed in TypeScript.

Instead, what we can do is intersect the resolved type of the Promise with the new property 'fullName'. We can use the 'Awaited' utility type to get the resolved type of the Promise.

    type ReturnTypeOfFetchUserWithFullName = Awaited<ReturnType<typeof fetchUser>> & {
        fullName: string;
    };

So first, we are using the 'ReturnType' utility type to get the return type of the 'fetchUser' function, which is a Promise type. Then we are using the 'Awaited' utility type to get the resolved type of that Promise, which is the actual return type of the 'fetchUser' function. Finally, we are using an intersection type to extend that resolved type with the new property 'fullName'.

And that's it! We have successfully extracted the types from the 'fetchUser' function and extended them to create our own types that we can use in our code.

This is actually how in real-world projects, we can extend the types of external libraries to fit our own use cases without having to manually define our own types and keep them in sync with the external library. The benefit of this approach is that if the external library changes the return type of the 'fetchUser' function, our own types will automatically update to reflect those changes, so we don't have to worry about manually updating our own types.