Let's take an example of 'Lodash' which is a third-party library that provides utility functions for common programming tasks.

Now if you only install 'lodash' in your project, TypeScript will complain because by default 'lodash' does not come with type definitions. To fix this, you need to install the type definitions for 'lodash' using the following command:

    npm install --save-dev @types/lodash

Now, let's say we have a function that uses the 'groupBy' function from lodash -

    import _ from 'lodash';

    const groupByAge = (array: unknown[]) => {
        const grouped = _.groupBy(array, "age");

        return grouped;
    };

    const result = groupByAge([
        {
            name: 'John',
            age: 20
        },

        {
            name: 'Jane',
            age: 20
        },

        {
            name: 'Mary',
            age: 30
        }
    ]);

Here, we are trying to group an array of objects by their 'age' property. However, since we have typed the input as 'unknown[]', TypeScript cannot infer the type of the objects in the array, and thus it cannot determine the type of the 'grouped' variable.

So, if you hover over the 'result' variable, you will see that it is of type '_.Dictionary<unknown[]>', which is not very helpful.

Now, to understand how 'groupBy' works, we have to actually look at its type definition which we can see by 'ctrl + click' on 'groupBy' in our code. This will take us to the type definition file for 'lodash', where we can see that 'groupBy' has two different ways to be called -

    groupBy<T>(collection: List<T> | null | undefined, iteratee?: ValueIteratee<T>): Dictionary<T[]>;

    groupBy<T extends object>(collection: T | null | undefined, iteratee?: ValueIteratee<T[keyof T]>): Dictionary<Array<T[keyof T]>>;

So, we can see that 'groupBy' is a generic function that takes a type parameter 'T'. The first way to call it is when the input is an array (or list) of type 'T', and the second way is when the input is an object of type 'T'.

In our case, we are passing an 'Array' so for us, the fist signature is the one that applies.

So, it looks like the 'groupBy' actually infers 'T' from the input array. This means that if we want to get proper type inference, we need to provide a more specific type for our input array. In our case, the type is 'unknown' but we actually want something like -

    {
        name: string;
        age: number;
    }[]

So, we can add a generic type parameter to our function to specify the type of the objects in the array. Moreover, since our function works with an 'age' property, we can also add a constraint to ensure that the type 'T' has an 'age' property of type 'number'. This way, we can get proper type inference for the 'grouped' variable -

    const groupByAge = <T extends { age: number }>(array: T[]) => {
        const grouped = _.groupBy(array, "age");

        return grouped;
    };

Here, we are saying that 'T' is a type that extends an object with an 'age' property of type 'number'. This way, when we call 'groupBy', TypeScript can infer the type of 'T' from the input array, and thus it can determine the type of the 'grouped' variable.

So, this is how we can find the proper type arguments and generics when using external libraries like 'lodash'. By looking at the type definitions of the library, we can understand how the functions work and what type parameters they expect, which allows us to provide the correct types in our code for better type inference and type safety.