In the previous section, we learned how we can navigate through the Express types and we understood how we can make use of various Generic type parameters to make our Express handlers type safe.

Let's try to implement that knowledge.

Let's say we have a function that returns a handler function. A handler function is what we use in Express to handle incoming requests.

    const makeTypeSafeGet = 
    (
        parser: (queryParams: Request['query']) => unknown,
        handler: RequestHandler
    ) => 
        (req: Request, res: Response, next: NextFunction) => {
            try {
                parser(req.query);
            } catch (e) {
                res.status(400).send("Invalid query: " + (e as Error).message);
                return;
            }

            return handler(req, res, next);
        }

Here, we have a function 'makeTypeSafeGet' that takes in a parser function and a handler function. The parser function is responsible for parsing the query parameters from the request and validating them. If the parser throws an error, we catch it and return a '400' response with the error message. If the parser succeeds, we call the handler function with the request, response, and next function.

So, we can use this like -

    const getUser = makeTypeSafeGet(
        (query) => {
            if (typeof query.id !== "string") {
                throw new Error ("You must pass an id!");
            }

            return {
                id: query.id
            }
        },
        (req, res) => {
            // req,query should be exactly the type returned from the parser above
            res.json({
                id: req.query.id,
                name: "Matt"
            });
        }
    );

    app.get("/user", getUser);

Here, we are using the 'makeTypeSafeGet' function to create a handler for the '/user' endpoint. The parser function checks if the 'id' query parameter is a string and throws an error if it's not. If the parser succeeds, the handler function can safely assume that 'req.query' has the type returned by the parser, which in this case is an object with an 'id' property of type string.

Now, the issue right now is that if you hover over 'req.query' in the handler function, you'll see that it is still of type 'ParsedQs' (the default type for query parameters in Express). We want it to be of the type returned by the parser function.

So, whatever the 'parser' returns should be the type of 'req.query' in the handler function.

This means, we definitely need to infer the type of returned value from the 'parser' function and then use that type to set the type of 'req.query' in the handler function. Let's first infer the type -

    const makeTypeSafeGet = 
    <TQuery>(
        parser: (queryParams: Request['query']) => TQuery,
        handler
    ) => {...}

So, here, we have added a generic type parameter 'TQuery' to the 'makeTypeSafeGet' function. This type parameter represents the type of the query parameters that the parser function returns. We have also updated the type of the 'parser' function to return 'TQuery'.

Alright, now that we have the type, now, we want to make sure the 'req.query' in the handler function is of type 'TQuery'. Now, as we learned in the previous section, the handler function accepts some generic type parameters for things like body, query, params, etc. So, we can set the type of 'req.query' by setting the appropriate generic type parameter when defining the handler function.

    const makeTypeSafeGet = 
    <TQuery>(
        parser: (queryParams: Request['query']) => TQuery,
        handler: RequestHandler<any, any, any, TQuery>
    ) => {...}

Now, we are setting the fourth generic type parameter of 'RequestHandler' to 'TQuery', which means that the 'req.query' in the handler function will now be of type 'TQuery'.

But this won't be enough because inside this 'makeTypeSafeGet' function, we have -

    (req: Request, res: Response, next: NextFunction) => {
        try {
            parser(req.query);
        } catch (e) {
            res.status(400).send("Invalid query: " + (e as Error).message);
            return;
        }
        return handler(req, res, next);
    }

Our 'req' also needs to be typed in such a way that 'req.query' is of type 'TQuery'. So, we need to update the type of 'req' as well -

    (req: Request<any, any, any, TQuery>, res: Response, next: NextFunction) => {...}

We can do this because remember that 'Request' is a generic type that accepts the types for params, resBody, reqBody, and query in that order. So, by setting the fourth generic type parameter to 'TQuery', we are telling TypeScript that 'req.query' should be of type 'TQuery'.

Well, now we get another error -

    try {
        parser(req.query); // ERROR - Argument of type 'TQuery' is not assignable to parameter of type 'ParsedQs'.
    } catch (e) {
        res.status(400).send("Invalid query: " + (e as Error).message);
        return;
    }

Well, the error says that 'TQuery' is not assignable to 'ParsedQs'. Now why do we get this error? 

Well, for this, we need to understand that 'TQuery' can be anything right now. Even a non-object type like 'string' or 'number'. But ideally, our query parameters should always be ab object. Due to this missing constraint, TypeScript is not able to guarantee that 'TQuery' will be compatible with 'ParsedQs', which is the default type for query parameters in Express.

So, one thing we can do is -

    <TQuery extends Record<string, any>>

This works perfectly fine because now we are saying that 'TQuery' must be an object type with string keys and any values. This way, TypeScript can guarantee that 'TQuery' will be compatible with 'ParsedQs', and the error will go away.

But there is an even better way to do this. Instead of using 'Record<string, any>', we can directly use 'Request['query']' as the constraint for 'TQuery' -

    <TQuery extends Request['query']>

Remember that 'Request['query']' is the type of 'req.query' in Express, which is 'ParsedQs'. By using this as the constraint, we are saying that 'TQuery' must be a type that is compatible with 'ParsedQs', which is exactly what we want.

And well, that's it! Now, we have successfully made our 'makeTypeSafeGet' function type safe with respect to the query parameters, and we can be confident that the types will work correctly throughout our code.