A lot of times when working with external libraries, you might find that the types provided by the library are not accurate or do not fit your use case. In such cases, you can override the types provided by the library to better suit your needs.

For example, let's say we have some third party library that provides a function -

    export const getAnimatingState = (): string => {
        if (Math.random() > 0.5) {
            return 'before-animation';
        }

        if (Math.random() > 0.5) {
            return 'animating';
        }

        return 'after-animation';
    }

And we can use this function in our code -

    const animatingState = getAnimatingState();

Now, maybe we want to make sure that 'animatingState' is a more specific type and not just a 'string' which it currently is. We want it to be -

    type AnimatingState = 'before-animation' | 'animating' | 'after-animation';

But since this function is coming from a third party library, we cannot change the return type of the function directly.

So, how do we override the type of 'animatingState' so that it is not a 'string' but rather the specific type we want?

Well, this is where we can use a declaration file in our code. Remember that a declaration file is a file with a '.d.ts' extension that contains type declarations for JavaScript code.

As we already know, we can use 'declare module' syntax to declare a module and its types. So, we can create a declaration file for the third party library and override the type of 'getAnimatingState' function to return our specific type.

For example, if our file is named 'index.d.ts', we can add the following code to it -

    type AnimatingState = 'before-animation' | 'animating' | 'after-animation';

    declare module "fake-external-lib" {
        export const getAnimatingState: () => AnimatingState;
    }

Woah! What just happened? 

By declaring a module with the same name as the third party library and providing our own type for the 'getAnimatingState' function, we have effectively overridden the type of that function in our code. Now, when we use 'getAnimatingState', it will return the specific type 'AnimatingState' instead of just a 'string'.

But, this is not very safe and should only be done if you are 100% sure of what you are doing.

Because, if in the declaration file you do -

    declare module "fake-external-lib" {
        export const asdasdasd: () => AnimatingState;
    }

Now, you just cannot import 'getAnimatingState' from 'fake-external-lib' and use it in your code because for TypeScript, the only thing that this module has is 'asdasdasd' function and not 'getAnimatingState'. So, you will get an error saying -

    Module '"fake-external-lib"' has no exported member 'getAnimatingState'.

So, be very careful when overriding types from external libraries and make sure that you are not breaking any existing functionality in the library.

You will very rarely use such overrides but it is good to know that you can do it if you need to.