Let's try something different.

What if we have an object type -

    interface Values {
        email: string;
        firstName: string;
        lastName: string;
    }

And we want to create a union type where each member is a tuple like this -

    type Expected = 
        | ['email', string]
        | ['firstName', string]
        | ['lastName', string];

Now, how can we achieve this?

If the ask was to create an object where keys are the same but values are transformed to tuples, then we would do -

    type ValuesAsUnionOfTuples = {
        [K in keyof Values]: [K, Values[K]]
    }

This would give us -

    {
        email: ['email', string];
        firstName: ['firstName', string];
        lastName: ['lastName', string];
    }

But in our case, we specifically want a union of tuples, not an object.

Now, just think for a bit.

Our type 'ValuesAsUnionOfTuples' is an object where each property is a tuple.

All we want to to is extract the values of this object as a union.

Now, forget that we want a union. What if I just want the tuple that corresponds to the key 'email'?

Normally, I would do -
    
    type ValuesAsUnionOfTuples = {
        [K in keyof Values]: [K, Values[K]]
    }

    type EmailTuple = ValuesAsUnionOfTuples['email'];

Similarly, if I want the tuple for 'firstName', I would do -

    type FirstNameTuple = ValuesAsUnionOfTuples['firstName'];

Now, what if I want to get all the tuples? I will simply pass 'keyof Values' to get all the values -

    type AllTuples = ValuesAsUnionOfTuples[keyof Values];

And that's it! We will now get -

    type AllTuples = ["email", string] | ["firstName", string] | ["lastName", string]

And in fact, we can combine everything into a single type definition like this -

    type ValuesAsUnionOfTuples =  {
        [K in keyof Values]: [K, Values[K]]
    } [keyof Values]

Yes, at first glance it looks a bit weird, but once you get the hang of it, it's quite a powerful technique! Here, we are re-indexing the mapped type to get the union of its values.

This is a really powerful pattern that you can use in various scenarios.