Node is a JavaScript runtime built on Chrome's V8 JavaScript engine. It allows developers to run JavaScript code outside of a web browser, making it possible to build server-side applications and tools. TypeScript, being a superset of JavaScript, can be seamlessly integrated with Node.js to enhance the development experience with static typing and modern JavaScript features.

There is only one thing that you need to do to integrate TypeScript with Node.js. You need to add a new dev dependency for the typings of Node.js. This can be done using npm or yarn -

    npm install --save @types/node

As this package name starts with '@types/', it means this is a 'DefinitelyTyped' package that provides type definitions for Node.js. Once you have installed this package, TypeScript will be able to recognize Node.js-specific globals and modules, such as 'process', and 'fs'. Without this, if you try to use Node.js-specific features in your TypeScript code, you will encounter type errors in the IDE.

For example, without this package, this line will throw an error in TypeScript -

    console.log(process.env);

The error will say -

    Cannot find name 'process'. Do you need to install type definitions for node? Try `npm i --save-dev @types/node` and then add 'node' to the types field in your tsconfig

Here, 'process' is a global variable provided by Node.js that contains information about the current Node.js process, including environment variables.

But, typescript does not know about it without the '@types/node' package.

After we install it, we need to also add 'node' to the 'types' array in the 'tsconfig.json' file like this -

    {
      "compilerOptions": {
        ...
        "types": ["node"]
      }
    }

And now, the error will go away and TypeScript will be able to understand the 'process' global variable and its properties.