We saw how we can use 'declare' keyword in TypeScript to declare types for variables, functions, and classes that are defined outside of our TypeScript code.

We also saw how we can use 'declare global' to add types to the global scope.

We also saw how we can use 'declare namespace' to define types for libraries that use namespaces.

Now, let's talk about declaring module types in TypeScript.

Let's say we have a code -

    import { myModuleFunc } from 'my-module';

Right now, TypeScript will throw an error saying that it cannot find a module named 'my-module'. For just this example, let's assume that 'my-module' is a JavaScript library that we are using in our TypeScript project, and we don't have type definitions for it.

So, how do we tell TypeScript that there is a module named 'my-module' and inside it there is a function named 'myModuleFunc' which is of type '() => void'?

Well, to do that, let's first ask ourselves, what if we just had to declare the type for 'myModuleFunc' without the module context? We could simply do this in our declaration file -

    declare const myModuleFunc: () => void;

Now, this would simply declare a global variable named 'myModuleFunc'. But we want to declare it inside the module 'my-module'. This is something similar to what we did when we used 'declare namespace' in previous examples.

Well, to declare module types in TypeScript, we can use the 'declare module' syntax. Here's how we can do it -

    declare module 'my-module' {
        const myModuleFunc: () => void;
    }

Here, we are telling TypeScript that there is a module named 'my-module', and inside it, there is a constant named 'myModuleFunc' which is of type '() => void'.

Since we know that 'declare' keyword is optional inside declaration files, we can also write it like this -

    module 'my-module' {
        const myModuleFunc: () => void;
    }

But for clarity, it's often better to include the 'declare' keyword.