So far, we have seen that we get errors in our declaration files but is it possible to configure TypeScript to ignore declaration file errors?

Yes, there is an option in tsconfig.json file called 'skipLibCheck'.

When we set skipLibCheck to 'true', TypeScript will skip type checking of all declaration files (*.d.ts files). This means that any errors in declaration files will be ignored and will not affect the compilation of our TypeScript code.

You can see this in action if this option is true and you write some invalid code in your declaration file. TypeScript will not throw any errors for that invalid code. For example, if we have this code in our declaration file -

    const x = 10;

Here, we are literally writing some invalid code in our declaration file. We know that runtime code cannot be written in declaration files. But if we have 'skipLibCheck' set to true in our tsconfig.json file, TypeScript will not throw any errors for this invalid code.

Now, if we have 'skipLibCheck' set to false, TypeScript will throw an error for this invalid code in our declaration file.

So, that's how we can use the 'skipLibCheck' option in tsconfig.json file to control whether TypeScript should type check declaration files or not.

Now, this flag should be 'true' most of the time and there is a good reason for this. Most of the time, the declaration files we use are from third-party libraries and we don't control them. So, if there are any errors in those declaration files, it is better to ignore them rather than letting them affect our code compilation.

There is also some performance benefits of setting this flag to true because TypeScript will skip type checking of all declaration files, which can save some time during compilation.

Ideally, I think there should have been an extra configuration option to only skip type checking of third-party declaration files while still type checking our own declaration files. But currently, we don't have such an option in TypeScript.