We have already seen how we can define types for things like Objects like this -

    function concatName(obj: { firstName: string; lastName?: string }): string {
        // SOME CODE
    }

But, do we have to write the type definition every time we want to use it?

Let's say we have this piece of code -


    const getRectangleArea = (rectangle: { width: number, height: number }): number => {
        return rectangle.width * rectangle.height;
    };

    const getRectanglePerimeter = (rectangle: { width: number, height: number }): number => {
        return 2 * (rectangle.width + rectangle.height);
    };

    const rectangle = { width: 10, height: 5 };

    const area = getRectangleArea(rectangle);
    const perimeter = getRectanglePerimeter(rectangle);

    console.log(`Area: ${area}, Perimeter: ${perimeter}`);

Looks fine, right?

But if you notice, both of our functions are using the same parameter type for the rectangle.

It is possible that some time in future, we have to update the structure of our 'rectangle' object to something like -

    const rectangle = { width: 10, height: 5, color: "blue" };

And maybe we want to use this new structure in our functions as well. 

Do we have to update the type definition in multiple places? 

Not if we use a single source of truth for our type definitions!

We can define a type for our rectangle object once and reuse it throughout our code.

To create a type in TypeScript we can use the 'type' keyword:

Let's create one for the 'rectangle' object -

    type Rectangle = {
        width: number;
        height: number;
    };

So now, we have a type named 'Rectangle' which we can use throughout our codebase. This means if we ever need to change the structure of our rectangle object, we only have to do it in one place!

We can update the code like this -

    const getRectangleArea = (rectangle: Rectangle): number => {
        return rectangle.width * rectangle.height;
    };

    const getRectanglePerimeter = (rectangle: Rectangle): number => {
        return 2 * (rectangle.width + rectangle.height);
    };

    const rectangle: Rectangle = { width: 10, height: 5 };

Usually, what you will see in codebases is that the types are kept in a separate file. This helps in maintaining a clean code structure and makes it easier to manage and update types as the codebase grows.