Since TypeScript is simply a superset of JavaScript, it supports both modules and scripts, just like JavaScript does.

So, if we have a file that does not have any import or export statements or a top-level 'await', it is treated as a script. On the other hand, if a file contains at least one import or export statement, or a top-level 'await', it is treated as a module.

But, what is the difference between the two?

Let's say we have two files in our project - script1.ts and script2.ts. 

The script1.ts file looks like this -

    const func = () => {
        console.log("This is a function inside script1.");
    }

And, we have a script2.ts file like this -

    func();

So, here, we are calling the func function defined in script1.ts from script2.ts. But, notice that we are not importing func in script2.ts. Still, this code will work just fine because both files are treated as scripts. In this case, all the variables and functions defined in script1.ts are available globally, so script2.ts can access them without any import statements.

But, as soon as we add an import or export statement in script1.ts, it is no longer a script; it becomes a module. For example, if we modify script1.ts like this -

    export {}

    const func = () => {
        console.log("This is a function inside script1.");
    }

Now, script1.ts is a module. In this case, the func function is not available globally anymore. So, if we try to run script2.ts as it is, we will get an error saying that func is not defined.

The only way to access func in script2.ts now is to first export it from script1.ts and then import it in script2.ts.

What if we have a file that we do not want to be treated as a script, but doesn't currently imports or exports anything?

Well, we can simply add an empty export statement like this -

    export {}

ANd now, this file will be treated as a module.