After modules and scripts, let's talk about 'Declaration Files' in TypeScript.

They are special type of files with the 'd.ts' extension.

As the name suggests, they are used to 'declare' something. Now, what is this 'something'?

Well, the main issue that these files try to solve is to bring type safety to JavaScript code. We have various libraries that are written in plain JavaScript. When we use these libraries in our TypeScript code, we lose type safety because TypeScript has no idea about the types used in these libraries. So, in that case, we can use declaration files that act as a 'blueprint' or an 'interface' that tells the TypeScript compiler about -

    - What functions, classes, and variables the library exports.
    - What arguments those functions take and what types they return.
    - The shapes of objects.

All this also means that in a declaration file, we cannot write runtime code. For example, we if we have a file foo.d.ts, we cannot write something like this -
  
    export const myFunc = () => {
        console.log("Hello world!")
    };

If you do this, either you will get an error instantly in the IDE, or when you try to compile the code, you will get an error like this -

    A 'const' initializer in an ambient context must be a string or numeric literal or literal enum reference.
    
    An implementation cannot be declared in ambient contexts.

This basically means that you cannot have any runtime code in a declaration file.

So, they only describe the types, interfaces, function signatures, etc.

So, we can have a file named foo.d.ts like this -

    export type MyType = string;

    export interface MyInterface {
        myProp: string;
    }

Here, we are declaring a type alias 'MyType' which is of type string, and an interface 'MyInterface' which has a property 'myProp' of type string.