# THE PRIMITIVES

In JavaScript, we have three very commonly used primitives - string, number and boolean. Each has a corresponding type in TypeScript.

 - string represents string values like "Hello World"
 - number is for numbers like 42. JavaScript does not have a special runtime value for integers so there is no "int" or "float" in JavaScript. Everything is simply "number".
 - boolean is for the two values true and false.
  
NOTE - The type names String, Number, and Boolean (starting with capital letters) are legal, but refer to some special built-in types that will very rarely appear in your code. Always use string, number, or boolean for types.

# ARRAYS

To specify the type of an array like [1,2,3], we can use the syntax "number[]". And this syntax works on any type e.g. string[], boolean[] and so on.

You may also see this written as Array<number> which mean the same thing as number[].

Remember that [number] is a different thing than number[].

# any

TypeScript also has a special type, 'any', that you can use whenever you don’t want a particular value to cause typechecking errors.

When a value is of type any, you can access any properties of it (which will in turn be of type any), call it like a function, assign it to (or from) a value of any type, or pretty much anything else that’s syntactically legal:

For example, if we have - 

    let obj: any = { x: 0 };

Then, None of the following lines of code will throw compiler errors - 

    obj.foo();
    obj();
    obj.bar = 100;
    obj = "hello";
    const n: number = obj;

Using 'any' disables all further type checking, and it is assumed you know the environment better than TypeScript.

The any type is useful when you don’t want to write out a long type just to convince TypeScript that a particular line of code is okay.

As we know, if the "noImplicitAny" flag is false, then Typescript will infer the type from the context and will default to "any". You usually want to avoid this, though, because any isn’t type-checked.

# TYPE ANNOTATIONS

When you declare a variable using const, var, or let, you can optionally add a type annotation to explicitly specify the type of the variable:

    let myName: string = "Alice";

TypeScript doesn’t use “types on the left”-style declarations like int x = 0; Type annotations will always go after the thing being typed.

In most cases, though, this isn’t needed. Wherever possible, TypeScript tries to automatically infer the types in your code. For example, the type of a variable is inferred based on the type of its initializer:

    let myName = "Alice";

Here, TypeScript will infer the type as "string", based on the value that we use to initialize this variable.
