Functions are the primary means of passing data around in JavaScript. TypeScript allows you to specify the types of both the input and output values of functions.

# PARAMETER TYPE ANNOTATIONS

When you declare a function, you can add type annotations after each parameter to declare what types of parameters the function accepts. Parameter type annotations go after the parameter name:

    function greet(name: string) {
        console.log("Hello, " + name.toUpperCase() + "!!");
    }

Here, we added a type annotation for the "name" parameter to tell TypeScript that this function should be passed a "string" value.

So, doing thing means whenever this function is called, TypeScript will check what is the type of value passed. If it is not a "string", then an error will be shown.

Even if you don’t have type annotations on your parameters, TypeScript will at least still check that you passed the right number of arguments.

# RETURN TYPE ANNOTATIONS
  
In above section, we added type annotations to the function parameters. But as we know, functions can also return values. And those values can also have specific types.

You can also add return type annotations. Return type annotations appear after the parameter list:

    function getFavoriteNumber(): number {
        return 26;
    }

Here, the function will return a "number". This means, we cannot write - 

    function getFavoriteNumber(): number {
        return "abc";
    }

This will be wrong because our function is supposed to return a "number" type not a "string".

Much like variable type annotations, you usually don’t need a return type annotation because TypeScript will infer the function’s return type based on its return statements. The type annotation in the above example doesn’t change anything. Some codebases will explicitly specify a return type for documentation purposes, to prevent accidental changes, or just for personal preference.

What about those Functions that return a Promise? Well, for that we can use the "Promise" type - 

    async function getFavoriteNumber(): Promise<number> {
        return 26;
    }

# ANONYMOUS FUNCTIONS

Anonymous functions are a little bit different from function declarations. When a function appears in a place where TypeScript can determine how it’s going to be called, the parameters of that function are automatically given types.

For example, if we have - 

    const names = ["Alice", "Bob", "Eve"];

And we write - 

    names.forEach(function (s) {
        console.log(s.toUpperCase());
    });

Here, Typescript will infer the type of "s" as "string" automatically.

This also happens with Arrow Functions.

    names.forEach((s) => {
        console.log(s.toUpperCase());
    });

Here as well, the type of "s" is inferred as string.

Even though the parameter s didn’t have a type annotation, TypeScript used the types of the forEach function, along with the inferred type of the array, to determine the type s will have.

This process is called contextual typing because the context that the function occurred within informs what type it should have.

Similar to the inference rules, you don’t need to explicitly learn how this happens, but understanding that it does happen can help you notice when type annotations aren’t needed.