Apart from the Primitives, the most common type is the "object" type. This refers to any JavaScript value with properties. In other words, basically everything in JavaScript.

For example, let's say we have a function that takes an object as an argument - 


    function printCoord(pt) {
        console.log("The coordinate's x value is " + pt.x);
        console.log("The coordinate's y value is " + pt.y);
    }
    printCoord({ x: 3, y: 7 });

As we know already, if the "noImplicitAny" flag is not turned on, then this code works without any issues because Typescript will infer the type of "pt" as "any".

But, if the flag is ON, then it will show an error saying "Parameter 'pt' implicitly has an 'any' type".

One way to fix it is to explicitly add type as "any".

    function printCoord(pt: any) {
        console.log("The coordinate's x value is " + pt.x);
        console.log("The coordinate's y value is " + pt.y);
    }
    printCoord({ x: 3, y: 7 });


But, this is not something we should do in TypeScript. Because here, we are simply focusing on hiding the error. But this is stil not the correct approach. Yes, if we are not sure what type of value we "pt" will be, then we can definitely annotate it with "any". But, what if we know what type of value it is?

What if we know that "pt" will always be ab object with two properties "x" and "y", where both "x" and "y" are numbers?

Well, we can explicitly tell that to Typescript by Type Annotation.

    function printCoord(pt: { x: number; y: number }) {
        console.log("The coordinate's x value is " + pt.x);
        console.log("The coordinate's y value is " + pt.y);
    }
    printCoord({ x: 3, y: 7 });

So now, TypeScript knows that the argument must be an object with "x" and "y" properties.

This also means that you cannot do something like - 

    printCoord({ x: 3, y: 7, z: 10 });

Because even though this is an object with "x" and "y" properties, as per our function definition, the object will "only" have two properties "x" and "y". Not more than that.

If we try the above code, we will see an error saying - 

    Object literal may only specify known properties, and 'z' does not exist in type '{ x: number; y: number; }'

# OPTIONAL PROPERTIES


What if we don't always need both "x" and "y"? Maybe we can also pass an object with only "x"? And also an object with both "x" and "y"?

In other words, what if "y" is an optional property?

Object types can also specify that some or all of their properties are optional. To do this, add a '?' after the property name:


    function printCoord(pt: { x: number; y?: number }) {
        console.log("The coordinate's x value is " + pt.x);
        if (pt.y) console.log("The coordinate's y value is " + pt.y);
    }
    printCoord({ x: 3});

Here, "y ?: number" means that the object that is passed to the function may or may not have a property named "y". But, it will definitely have a property named "x" since "x" does not have a "?" after it. And that's why, we can call printCoord({ x: 3}) without providing a "y" value. But, we cannot call printCoord({ y: 3}) beacuse "x" value is not optional.