One really cool feature of TypeScript is that you can take the existing types and build new types out of them using a variety of Operators.

# DEFINING A UNION TYPE

The first way to combine types you might see is a union type. A union type is a type formed from two or more other types, representing values that may be any one of those types. We refer to each of these types as the union’s members.

For example, let's say that we have a function that accepts a value. Now, this value can be a number or it can be a string. So, in other words, we can pass both number and string to this function and the code should still work fine.

In such cases, we have to define a "UNION" type.

    function printId(id: number | string) {
        console.log("Your ID is: " + id);
    }

    printId(101);
    printId("202");

Here we are accepting an argument named "id" which has a type as "number | string". This means that "id" can be "number" or a "string". And that's why, we can call this function by passing number as well as string.

# WORKING WITH UNION TYPES

Let's take an example - 

    function printId(id: number | string) {
        console.log(id.toUpperCase());
    }

Will the code throw any error? You may think that it should not because "toUpperCase()" is a method that every "string" has in TypeScript and "id" can be a string or a number. So, it should work fine.

But, that's not the case. This code will throw an error.

The error will be - 

    Property 'toUpperCase' does not exist on type 'string | number'.

    Property 'toUpperCase' does not exist on type 'number'.

Did you get it?

TypeScript will only allow an operation if it is valid for every member of the union. For example, if you have the union string | number, you can’t use methods that are only available on string.

TypeScript doesn't know the exact type when the function is defined. So, the function might also get a "number" as input and for the number type, we know that there is no method named "toUpperCase()".

The solution is to "NARROW" the union with code, something we would do in JavaScript as well. Because, if in JavaScript also we had this same code without Type annotations, we would first check the type of the value and only then use the methods. 

So, we can use the "typeof" operator to check the types before we do something -

    function printId(id: number | string) {
        if (typeof id === "string") {
            // id is of type 'string'
            console.log(id.toUpperCase());
        } else {
            // id is of type 'number'
            console.log(id);
        }
    }

And now, there is no error thrown because Typescript knows that the "toUpperCase()" will only be called if the "id" is a string. It won't be called if the "id" is a number.

Another example is to use a function like Array.isArray:

    function welcomePeople(x: string[] | string) {
        if (Array.isArray(x)) {
            // Here: 'x' is 'string[]'
            console.log("Hello, " + x.join(" and "));
        } else {
            // Here: 'x' is 'string'
            console.log("Welcome lone traveler " + x);
        }
    }

The Array.isArray will check if the input value is an array or not.

Notice that in the else branch, we don’t need to do anything special - if x wasn’t a string[], then it must have been a string.

Sometimes you’ll have a union where all the members have something in common. For example, both arrays and strings have a slice method. If every member in a union has a property in common, you can use that property without narrowing:

    function getFirstThree(x: number[] | string) {
        return x.slice(0, 3);
    }



