For objects with a couple of properties, we can write type annotations like - 

    function printCoord(pt: {x: number, y: number}) {
        console.log("The coordinate's x value is " + pt.x);
        console.log("The coordinate's y value is " + pt.y);
    }

But, what about objects with a lot of properties and on top of that, what if we have to write the same type annotation at multiple places? Our code will become cluttered.

What if we can define that type annotation with a simple name and then simply use that name going forward?

A type alias is exactly that - a name for any type. 

    type Point = {
        x: number;
        y: number;
    };
    
    function printCoord(pt: Point) {
        console.log("The coordinate's x value is " + pt.x);
        console.log("The coordinate's y value is " + pt.y);
    }

So, for the type { x: number, y: number}, we defined a new type alias named "Point". So now, wherever we want to add a type annotation for { x: number, y: number}, we can instead use the name "Point".

Now, it is not limited to only objects. We can add a type alias to any type. For example, if we have a Union type - 

    type ID = number | string;

Note that aliases are only aliases - you cannot use type aliases to create different/distinct “versions” of the same type. When you use the alias, it’s exactly as if you had written the aliased type. 

In other words, the below code might look illegal, but is OK according to TypeScript because both types are aliases for the same type:

    type UserInputSanitizedString = string;
    
    function sanitizeInput(str: string): UserInputSanitizedString {
        return sanitize(str);
    }
    
    // Create a sanitized input
    let userInput = sanitizeInput(getInput());
    
    // Can still be re-assigned with a string though
    userInput = "new input";
