An interface declaration is another way to name an object type:

    interface Point {
        x: number;
        y: number;
    }
 
    function printCoord(pt: Point) {
        console.log("The coordinate's x value is " + pt.x);
        console.log("The coordinate's y value is " + pt.y);
    }
    
    printCoord({ x: 100, y: 100 });

Just like when we used a type alias, the example works just as if we had used an anonymous object type. TypeScript is only concerned with the structure of the value we passed to printCoord - it only cares that it has the expected properties. Being concerned only with the structure and capabilities of types is why we call TypeScript a "structurally typed" type system.

# DIFFERENCES BETWEEN TYPE ALIASES AND INTERFACES

Type aliases and interfaces are very similar, and in many cases you can choose between them freely. Almost all features of an interface are available in type, the key distinction is that a type cannot be re-opened to add new properties vs an interface which is always extendable.

## EXTENDING AN INTERFACE & A TYPE 

Here is how we Extend an Interface - 

    interface Animal {
        name: string;
    }

    interface Bear extends Animal {
        honey: boolean;
    }

    const bear = getBear();
    bear.name;
    bear.honey;

So, we use the "extends" keyword to extend an Interface.

What about a Type?

    type Animal = {
        name: string;
    }

    type Bear = Animal & { 
        honey: boolean;
    }

    const bear = getBear();
    bear.name;
    bear.honey;

In case of a "Type", we can use an "Intersection type" that combines multiple types into one. So, in above code, we are combining the two types "Animal" and {honey: boolean} into one single type with alias "Bear".

## ADDING NEW FIELDS

Once a Type is created, we cannot change it.

For example, if we have - 

    type Name = {
        firstName: string;
    } 

We cannot change it by doing - 

    type Name = {
        lastName: string;
    }

It will throw an error saying Duplicate identifier 'Name'.

On the other hand, we can add new fields to an existing Interface.

For example, if we have the following code -

    interface Name {
        firstName: string;
    }


    interface Name {
        lastName: string;
    }


This above code does not mean that the interface "Name" only has one property named "lastName", just because we redeclared it the second time. Instead, when we redeclared it, TypeScript will take the new properties and then combine them with the previous ones.

It means, after we write the above code, the interface "Name" now has two properties "firstName" and "lastName". And that's how we add new fields to an existing interface.

You can confirm the same if you try to define a new object of type "Name" with only lastName - 

    let obj: Name = {lastName: "Snow"}

It will throw an error saying -

    Property 'firstName' is missing in type '{ lastName: string; }' but required in type 'Name'

So the bottom line is that, To add a property you can define the same interface again and add the additional properties.

For the most part, you can choose based on personal preference, and TypeScript will tell you if it needs something to be the other kind of declaration. If you would like a heuristic, use interface until you need to use features from type.