Sometimes you will have information about the type of a value that TypeScript can’t know about.

For example, if you’re using document.getElementById, TypeScript only knows that this will return some kind of HTMLElement, but you might know that your page will always have an HTMLCanvasElement with a given ID.

So, we can explicitly tell TypeScript that this is the type of value we will get for this variable.

We do that using "Type Assertion".

    const myCanvas = document.getElementById("main_canvas");

So, in the above code, TypeScript will automatically infer that "myCanvas" is of type "HTMLElement" because it is pretty obvious that getElementById will return an "HTMLElement" type only.

But, we know that "main_canvas" is an ID we have given to a "CANVAS" element so we can explicitly tell that to TypeScript.

    const myCanvas = document.getElementById("main_canvas") as HTMLCanvasElement;

And here, we used "Type Assertion".

Ofcourse Type Assertions are something that are native to TypeScript and they are not a feature of JavaScript. So when you compile your ts file into js, you will not see any Type Assertions in the js file. In other words, Type Assertions are removed at compile-time.

# ANOTHER WAY TO USE TYPE ASSERTIONS

Instead of "as" syntax, we can use the angle-bracket syntax as well. It looks something like this - 

    const myCanvas = <HTMLCanvasElement> document.getElementById("main_canvas");

# IMPORTANT THINGS TO NOTE

Just because Type Assertions are a feature provided by TypeScript, we should not abuse it. If we explicitly tell TypeScript that some value is of a specific type, we should be sure of that.

Because type assertions are removed at compile-time, there is no runtime checking associated with a type assertion. There won’t be an exception or null generated if the type assertion is wrong.

TypeScript only allows type assertions which convert to a more specific or less specific version of a type. This rule prevents “impossible” coercions like:

    const x = "hello" as number;

The above code does not make any sense because here, we are telling TypeScript to infer a string as a number which is obviously not possible. So, in such cases, we will get an error saying - 

    Conversion of type 'string' to type 'number' may be a mistake because neither type sufficiently overlaps with the other. If this was intentional, convert the expression to 'unknown' first.

Sometimes you may want to use type assertions in such cases so in such cases, you can use "any" type or "unknown" type.

    const a = expr as any as T;

