We can also refer to specific strings and numbers in type annotations.

One way to think about this is to consider how JavaScript comes with different ways to declare a variable. Both var and let allow for changing what is held inside the variable, and const does not. This is reflected in how TypeScript creates types for literals.

# STRING LITERAL TYPES

For example, if we have the below code - 

    let changingString = "Hello World";
    changingString = "Olá Mundo";

This works because we declare "changingString" using "let" which means we can change the value later.

But, what if we have a const?

In that case, if we have - 

    const constantString = "Hello World";

We cannot do - 

    constantString = "New Value";

That's because the "constantString" will have the value that we gave it the very first time. We cannot change that value later.

And there is a reason for that. If you write the code in code editor - 

    let changingString = "Hello World";

And if you hover over "changingString", you will see that code editor will show this - 

    let changingString: string

But, if you do the same with -

    const constantString = "Hello World";

Then Typescript will not infer the type of "constantString" as "string". In fact, it will infer the type as - 

    const constantString: "Hello World"

And that's what we call as "Literal Types" in Typescript. By themselves, the Literal Types are not of much use.

But, they are really helpful when we combine literals into unions.

For example, suppose that we have a function "printText" which only accepts a certain set of string values. In that case, we can define that behavior by combining literal types with unions.

    function printText(s: string, alignment: "left" | "right" | "center") {
        // ...
    }

So here, we say that the function "printText" can take two arguments, where the first one can be any type of string. But, the second argument can only be one of these three strings -> "left", "right", or "center".

It means, when we write - 

    printText("Hello, world", "left");

There is no issue.

But, when we write - 

    printText("G'day, mate", "centre");

There is an error because "centre" is not one of the three allowed strings (Not that it is "centre" instead of "center").

# NUMERIC LITERAL TYPES

The literal types are not just limited to string values. We can also have Numeric Literal Types. 

For example, let's say we have a function to compare two values and this function with return either 0, 1 or -1. There cannot be any other return value. So, we can write - 

    function compare(a: string, b: string): -1 | 0 | 1 {
        return a === b ? 0 : a > b ? 1 : -1;
    }

So here, when we Type Annotate this function's return value, we write "-1 | 0 | 1" which this function returns any one of these three values.

# COMBINING LITERAL AND NON LITERAL TYPES

We can combine literal types with non literal types.

For example, maybe there is a function that types either an object or a specific string as input. We can define such a behavior by combining Literal and Non Literal Types.

    interface Options {
        width: number;
    }
    function configure(x: Options | "auto") {
        // ...
    }

So now, the below calls are valid calls - 

    configure({ width: 100 });
    configure("auto");

# LITERAL INFERENCE

When you initialize a variable with an object, TypeScript assumes that the properties of that object might change values later. For example, if you wrote code like this:

    const obj = { counter: 0 };

Here, Typescript will not assume that "counter" should have a fixed value of 0. It does not matter that we have used "const" here.

In fact, as per TypeScript, the type of counter is "number" instead of a literal type 0.

This means, we can write - 

    obj.counter = 1

And this same thing happens if we have "const" objects with strings.

For example, if we have - 

    const req = { url: "https://example.com", method: "GET" };

Suppose there is a function that takes "url" as first argument which is of type "string", and "method" as second argument which is of type "GET" | "POST" - 

    declare function handleRequest(url: string, method: "GET" | "POST"): void;

What do you think will happen if we call this method as - 

    handleRequest(req.url, req.method);

Remember that "req.method" is of type "string", while the function accetps a method argument of type "GET" | "POST".

So, there is an error -

    Argument of type 'string' is not assignable to parameter of type '"GET" | "POST"'.

But, how to get around this issue?

Well, for that, we can add Type Assertions.

We can either add it when we define the object - 

    const req = { url: "https://example.com", method: "GET" as "GET" };

Or, we can add Type Assertion when we call the function - 

    handleRequest(req.url, req.method as "GET");

The "as const" suffix acts like const but for the type system, ensuring that all properties are assigned the literal type instead of a more general version like string or number.





