In JavaScript, if we have to represent an "absent" or "uninitialized" value, we have two primitive values for that. They are "null" and "undefined".

TypeScript has two corresponding types by the same names. How these types behave depends on whether you have the "strictNullChecks" option on.

Remember the "strictNullChecks" flag that we discussed before in the "strictness" section?

To recap, the "strictNullChecks" flag makes handling null and undefined more explicit, and spares us from worrying about whether we forgot to handle null and undefined.

For example, lets say we have the following function that accepts a value which can be a string or it can also be null.

    
    function liveDangerously(x: number | null) {
        console.log(x.toFixed());
    }

Here, if the "strictNullChecks" flag is turned off, then this code will not show any errors. But, we may face issues in the runtime because if "x" is null, then there cannot be a "toFixed" method on it.

If "structNullChecks" flag is turned ON, then this code will show an error saying - 

    'x' is possibly 'null'

One way to work around this is to manually check if "x" is null or not and only then apply the logic.

    function liveDangerously(x: number | null) {
        if (x === null) return
        console.log(x.toFixed());
    }

The above code will no longer show any error because Typescript now knows that if "x" is null, then the code won't even reach the console log. So, there is no chance of an issue.

Hence, With "strictNullChecks" on, when a value is null or undefined, you will need to test for those values before using methods or properties on that value. 

# NON-NULL ASSERTION OPERATOR

TypeScript also has a special syntax for removing null and undefined from a type without doing any explicit checking. Writing ! after any expression is effectively a type assertion that the value isn’t null or undefined:

So, for the above example, we can also write - 

    function liveDangerously(x: number | null) {
        console.log(x!.toFixed());
    }

Here we are adding an "!" after "x".

It is a way to tell the compiler "this expression cannot be null or undefined here, so don't complain about the possibility of it being null or undefined." 

With this opearator, we say to the compiler: "As the developer, I know better than you that this variable cannot be null right now".

Just like other type assertions, this doesn’t change the runtime behavior of your code, so it’s important to only use '!' when you know that the value can’t be null or undefined. The above example shows that "x" can be null as well because we explicitly tell TypeScript that its type is "number | null".

So in such cases, it is not advisable to use this operator and instead, simply add an if check to check if "x" is null or undefined, before calling any method on it.



