Enums are one of the few features TypeScript has which is not a type-level extension of JavaScript.

They alow a developer to define a set of named constants. Typescript offers both Numbe-based and String-based Enums.

Enums in TypeScript are usually used to represent a determined number of options for a given value. This data is arranged in a set of key/value pairs. While the keys must be strings, as with JavaScript objects in general, the values for enum members are often auto-incremented numbers that mainly serve to distinguish one member from the other. 

# NUMERIC ENUMS IN TYPESCRIPT

Enums with only number values are called numeric enums.

To define an Enum in Typescript, we use the "enum" keyword, followed by the name of that enum. Then, you will have a block inside curly brackets where you will define the enum members.

For example, let's say we have to define an enum "Direction" which will have four members in it. We can define it like this - 

    enum Direction {
        Up = 1,
        Down,
        Left,
        Right,
    }

So, this enum "Direction" is representing all the directions. The reason why an Enum is a perfect data structure here is because there are always only four options for directions - Up, Down, Left and Right.

Note how "Up" is initialized by "1" and others are not initialized. The thing is, when we initialize any member in an enum by a number, all the following members will get auto incremented values.

For example, "Down" will get a value of 2, "Left" will get a value of 3, and "Right" will get a value of 4.

But, is this initialization of first member necessary? NO! We can even write - 

    enum Direction {
        Up,
        Down,
        Left,
        Right,
    }

In this case, "Up" will get a value 0, "Down" will get a value 1 and so on. This auto-incrementing behavior is useful for cases where we might not care about the member values themselves, but do care that each value is distinct from other values in the same enum.

Note that Enums are not a feature offered in JavaScript. So, when you compile your .ts file into .js file where the .ts file contains Enums, the .js file will not have the same code.

For example, if our .ts file has this enum -

    enum Direction {
        Up,
        Down,
        Left,
        Right
    }

And we compile this file, then we will see that in .js file, we will have -

    var Direction;
    (function (Direction) {
        Direction[Direction["Up"] = 0] = "Up";
        Direction[Direction["Down"] = 1] = "Down";
        Direction[Direction["Left"] = 2] = "Left";
        Direction[Direction["Right"] = 3] = "Right";
    })(Direction || (Direction = {}));

So, you can see that to have an enum-like data structure in javascript, some complex code has to be written. But the same can be achieved in Typescript using enums.

## USING AN ENUM

So, once we create an enum, how can we use it?

Using an enum is simple: just access any member as a property off of the enum itself, and declare types using the name of the enum:

For example, if we have the following enum - 

    enum UserResponse {
        No = 0,
        Yes = 1,
    }

And there is a function - 

    function respond(recipient: string, message: any): void {
        // ...
    }

We can even declare types using the enum name. For example, we can say that the "message" should be of type "UserResponse" -

    function respond(recipient: string, message: UserResponse): void {
        // ...
    }

This would mean we would have to pass the values when calling the function as - 

    respond("John", UserResponse.No);
    respond("John", UserResponse.Yes);

If you pass value that is not compatible with the enum type of your message variable, Typescript will display an error. For example, if you try to write - 

    respond("John", "No");

Typescript will say - Argument of type '"No"' is not assignable to parameter of type 'UserResponse'.

So, "message" can only be one of the members of the UserResponse enum.

One advantage of "Numeric" enums is that, you can also set the value of your variables to numeric values.

In above example, we can also write - 

    response("John", 0)

And the code will work without any issue. Because, inside UserResponse enum, 0 is the value of a member so 0 is a valid value that can be passed. Same is the case with 1. Again, this will only work with "Numeric" enums.

# STRING ENUMS IN TYPESCRIPT

As the name suggests, in String Enums, the values of members are Strings, not numbers. For example - 

    enum Direction {
        Up = "UP",
        Down = "DOWN",
        Left = "LEFT",
        Right = "RIGHT",
    }

Each member has to be a contant initialized with a string or with another string enum member.

Ofcourse this means there is no "auto-increment" behavior as numeric enums.

While string enums don’t have auto-incrementing behavior, string enums have the benefit that they “serialize” well. In other words, if you were debugging and had to read the runtime value of a numeric enum, the value is often opaque - it doesn’t convey any useful meaning on its own (though reverse mapping can often help). 

String enums allow you to give a meaningful and readable value when your code runs, independent of the name of the enum member itself.

Now, one thing to note here is that, if you have an string enum with the first memeber initialized with some string, then, the following members also need to be initialized with either a number or a string. The reason is simply, because the first member is initialized with a string, Typescript will not know how to automatically set the values for the following members. If the first member had a number as its value, then Typescript would've just auto incremented the value for each following member. But that cannot be done in case of a string.

So, if you write - 

    enum Direction {
        Up = "Up",
        Down,
        Left,
        Right
    }

An error will be thrown for all the other memebers after "Up" saying - 

    Enum member must have initializer.

But, this was not the case when Up was initialized with a number.

Now, this also means that you can initialize the last member with a string and not all the members before it and this will be a valid code.

    enum Direction {
        Up,
        Down,
        Left,
        Right = "Right"
    }

Because in this case, Typescript will auto-assign values for "Up", "Down" and "Left" as 0, 1, and 2. Whereas for "Right", the value is "Right".

And with this, we can see that it does not matter that an enum can only have string values for all members or number values for all members.

Enums can be heterogeneous, meaning they can be mixed with string and numeric members.

Technically enums can be mixed with string and numeric members, but it’s not clear why you would ever want to do so. Unless you’re really trying to take advantage of JavaScript’s runtime behavior in a clever way, it’s advised that you don’t do this.

# BI-DIRECTIONAL ENUM MEMBERS

There is one thing that cannot be done with string enums but it is possible with numeric enums.

If we have following enum - 

    enum Direction {
        Up = "UP",
        Down = "DOWN",
        Left = "LEFT",
        Right = "RIGHT"
    }

And we have a function as - 

    function print(direction: Direction) {
        console.log(direction);
    }

We can call this function only by passing one of these values -

    print(Direction.Up)
    print(Direction.Down)
    print(Direction.Left)
    print(Direction.Right)

It is not possible to call this function by doing - 

    print("Up")
    print("Down")
    print("Left")
    print("Right")

Remember that in case of numeric enums, we were able to call the function by passing both the members as well as the values and there was no error. But why is this the case?

That's because of how the enums in Typescript are converted into Javascript code.

Upon TypeScript compilation, enums are translated into JavaScript objects. 

However, there are a few features of enums that differentiate them from objects. They offer a more stable data structure for storing constant members than traditional JavaScript objects, and also offer bi-directional referencing for enum members. 

Let's suppose, we have the following Enum - 

    enum Direction {
        Up = "UP",
        Down = "DOWN",
        Left = "LEFT",
        Right = "RIGHT"
    }

As we can see, this is a String enum because all members have string values. 

Now, when this code is compile to javascript, we get this - 

    var Direction;
    (function (Direction) {
        Direction["Up"] = "UP";
        Direction["Down"] = "DOWN";
        Direction["Left"] = "LEFT";
        Direction["Right"] = "RIGHT";
    })(Direction || (Direction = {}));

We see that a new variable "Direction" is created with no value initially. Then, there is an Immediately Invoked Function Expression or IIFE which takes this variable as an input while also setting its value as an empty object ({}) if its value is not already set.

And inside the function, the code then assigns multiple properties to this "Direction" object.

Notice that each property is one member of your original enum, with the values set to the enum’s member value.

And that's pretty much it. That's how String Enums are translated to Javascript.

But, what about Numeric Enums, is the process the same for them?

Let's take this enum - 

    enum Direction {
        Up,
        Down,
        Left,
        Right"
    }

This will be the code in JavaScript - 

    var Direction;
    (function (Direction) {
        Direction[Direction["Up"] = 0] = "Up";
        Direction[Direction["Down"] = 1] = "Down";
        Direction[Direction["Left"] = 2] = "Left";
        Direction[Direction["Right"] = 3] = "Right";
        Direction[Direction[""] = 4] = "";
    })(Direction || (Direction = {}));

Did you notice something?

In addition to each member of the enum becoming a property of the object (CardinalDirection["Up"] = 0), the enum also creates a key for each number and assigns the string as the value.

    Direction[Direction["Up"] = 0] = "Up";

In the case of Up, Direction["Up"] = 0 returns the value 0, and CardinalDirection[0] = "Up" assigns the value "North" to the key "0".

This allows for a Bi-Directional relationship between the names of the numeric numbers and their values.

This means, if you do -

    console.log(Direction.Up);

This will give "1" as the output

And if you do -

    console.log(Direction[0]);

This will give "Up" as the output.

And this becomes more clear if you console log the "Direction" object that Javascript code creates - 

    {
        '0': 'Up',
        '1': 'Down',
        '2': 'Left',
        '3': 'Right',
        Up: 0,
        Down: 1,
        Left: 2,
        Right: 3
    }

You will see that there are both sets of key/value pairs that create the bi-directionality effect.

And this Bi-Directionality is the reason why if a variable has a type as a Numeric Enum, we can pass that variable a value that is not only the member of that enum, but also the value of any member.

And even if there is an enum that has at least one member with a numeric value, the Javascript code will generate the bi-directional code for that member.

For example, if we had - 

    enum Direction {
        Up,
        Down = "DOWN",
        Left = "LEFT",
        Right = "RIGHT"
    }

Here, the value for "Up" will be 0 which is a number. 

So, when converted to JavaScript, this will be the "Direction" object - 

    { 
        '0': 'Up', 
        Up: 0, 
        Down: 'DOWN', 
        Left: 'LEFT', 
        Right: 'RIGHT'
    }

Note how for the enum member that had a numeric value, the object has a bi-directional mapping. But that is not the case with the members with a string value.

# CONST ENUMS

Another type of Enums are "Const" enums and the thing is, they disappear at runtime. To declare a const enum, we just have top add a "const" keyword in front of it.

Now, what does it mean when we say they "disappear" at runtime?

Well, as we have seen, if we have a normal enum (doesn't matter if numeric or string) -


    enum Direction {
        Up,
        Down,
        Left,
        Right,
    }

This above enum code will be compiled to javascript like this - 

    var Direction;
    (function (Direction) {
        Direction[(Direction["Up"] = 0)] = "Up";
        Direction[(Direction["Down"] = 1)] = "Down";
        Direction[(Direction["Left"] = 2)] = "Left";
        Direction[(Direction["Right"] = 3)] = "Right";
    })(Direction || (Direction = {}));

This is equivalent to doing this - 

    const Direction = {
        0: "Up",
        Up: 0,
        1: "Down",
        Down: 1,
        2: "Left",
        Left: 2,
        3: "Right",
        Right: 3,
    };

But, when we use a "const" enum - 

    const enum Direction {
        Up,
        Down,
        Left,
        Right,
    }

Something very unexpected happens when we compile this code. We see that the javascript file will have nothing in place of this enum. It means, this code is just for typescript and it is not compiled to javascript. That's what it means when we say the const enums disappear at runtime.

When using const enums, the enum itself has been removed, and the type checking of the enum values becomes the responsibility of TypeScript's compiler.

But what if we have some variable that is using the const enum values? 

What if we have -

    let upDirection = Direction.Up

Well, we see that this will get converted to Javascript -

    var upDirection = 0 /* Direction.Up */;

Or, maybe we have an object that uses these values like - 

    const directions = [
        Direction.Up,
        Direction.Down,
        Direction.Left,
        Direction.Right,
    ]

This will get transpiled to -

    var directions = [
        0 /* Direction.Up */,
        1 /* Direction.Down */,
        2 /* Direction.Left */,
        3 /* Direction.Right */,
    ];

# WHY CONST ENUMS SHOULD PROBABLY BE AVOIDED

Despite const enums being a handy shorthand for specifying repeating patterns, they are somewhat frowned upon.

Because const enums require the TypeScript compiler to understand the value of the constants during transpilation, there can be implications for code that runs under different build tools like ESBuild or SWC. These tools do not have a full TypeScript compiler, but instead only have the JavaScript Abstract Syntax Tree (AST).

The TypeScript team suggests avoiding const enums in your library code. They may be acceptable in application code, but with their weirdness it may not be worth the pain.

Generally speaking, you should stick with built-in enums, but even then they might not be worth it.

# as Const

Well, in Modern Typescript, there might not be a need of enum when you can use "as const" after an object definition.

For example, if we have an enum as -

    const enum EDirection {
        Up,
        Down,
        Left,
        Right,
    }

And we know that in Javascript, it will just be an object with some key values, we can instead create a simple object in Typescript. 

    const ODirection = {
        Up: 0,
        Down: 1,
        Left: 2,
        Right: 3,
    }

Here, you may say that this defeats the purpose of an enum because we can change the values of the object properties. Yes, we can. But, to avoid that, we can use "as const" - 

    const ODirection = {
        Up: 0,
        Down: 1,
        Left: 2,
        Right: 3,
    } as const;

And now, you will see that in Javascript code, it will be transpiled to this - 

    var ODirection = {
        Up: 0,
        Down: 1,
        Left: 2,
        Right: 3,
    };

So, you can say that using "as const" keeps your codebase aligned with the state of Javascript.

There is a slightly different way to use these "as const" objects as types.

In case of enums, we can directly use them as types like - 

    function walk(dir: EDirection) {}
 
But, we cannot directly do -

    function walk(dir: ODirection) {}

Typescript will throw an error saying -

    ODirection' refers to a value, but is being used as a type here. Did you mean 'typeof ODirection'

And to fix this, we have to define a type as - 

    type Direction = typeof ODirection[keyof typeof ODirection];

What this is doing is declaring a type similar to this - 

    type Direction = 0 | 1 | 2 | 3

So, what we are saying is create a type that takes only the values that are the values in ODirection object. That is, 0, 1, 2, and 3.

    typeof ODirection => This means the type of "ODirection" which is "Object".

Now, speaking of "keyof", keyof of some type "T" gives you a new type that is a union of literal types and these literal types are the names of the properties of T.

Here, "T" is nothing but "ODirection" object. So, we are saying that give us a new type that is the union of the names of properties of 'ODirection'.

Here, properties of "ODirection" are "Up", "Down", "Left", "Right".

So, if we only write - 

    type Direction = keyof typeof ODirection;

Note that we are not writing - 

    type Direction = keyof ODirection;

Because remember that "T" is a type when we write "keyof T". But here, ODirection is not a Type. It is a value. So, we have to also specify what its type is. And hence, we write - 

    keyof typeof ODirection

The "typeof ODirection" gives you the type as - 

     {
        Up: number
        Down: number
        Left: number
        Right: number
    }

And then keyof operator gives you the literal type union as - 

    "Up" | "Down" | "Left" | "Right"

This is equivalent of writing - 

    type Direction = "Up" | "Down" | "Left" | "Right"

But, we want the type "Direction" to be a union of literal types where each type is the "value" of the properties of "ODirection" object, not the name of properties themselves.

And that's why we say - 

    typeof ODirection[keyof typeof ODirection];

So, once we define this type, we can then use this "as const" object as a type as - 

    type Direction = typeof ODirection[keyof typeof ODirection];
    function walk(dir: Direction) {}





 