Suppose, we have a function called padLeft - 


    function padLeft(padding: number | string, input: string): string {
        throw new Error("Not implemented yet!");
    }

As we can see, the argument "padding" is of type "number | string". This is a union type which means padding can be either a number or a string.

As we know already, this means that if we directly want to use some properties and methods on it, we can only use the properties and methods that are available for both a number and string.

For example, we cannot write something like - 

    function padLeft(padding: number | string, input: string): string {
        return " ".repeat(padding) + input;

    }

This will give an error which says that -

    Argument of type 'string | number' is not assignable to parameter of type 'number'.
    
    Type 'string' is not assignable to type 'number'.

And that's because the "repeat" method expects a number as its input. But here, we are passing something that may not be a number as it can also be a string.

So, what is the workaround?

There is a concept called "Narrowing" in Typescript which is a process that refines the value of multiple types into a single, specific type. Typescript uses special checks called "Type Guards" to narrow down the types of values. The benefit is that it can help avoid type errors and also access the non-shared members of union types.

Let's see how can be use Narrowing in the above example.'

Basically, when we pass a number, we want to use it with "repeat" method. But, when we pass a string, we just want to concatenate it with the "input".

So, we can say - 

    function padLeft(padding: number | string, input: string): string {
        if (typeof padding === "number") {
            return " ".repeat(padding) + input;
        }
        return padding + input;
    }

Notice how we are adding 'typeof padding === "number"' check before we use the "repeat" method.

Within our if check, TypeScript sees typeof padding === "number" and understands that as a special form of code called a type guard. 

TypeScript follows possible paths of execution that our programs can take to analyze the most specific possible type of a value at a given position. It looks at these special checks (called type guards) and assignments, and the process of refining types to more specific types than declared is called "narrowing".

So now, there will not be any error because now, Typescript knows that even if we pass a string, the first if block will not even run because it only gets executed if "padding" is a number.

And if "padding" is passed as a number, then the if check will pass and then the code inside if block runs.

And you will also see this if you hover over the variable "padding" inside the if check. You will see its type inferred as "number", not "number | string".

Similarly, the "padding" variable in the last return statement will have a type as "string", not "number | string".

And this is the basic concept of "Narrowing" in Typescript.
