As we learned in previous section, there is a concept of "type guards" when we talk about Narrowing. And there are various types of Type Guards.

Javascript supports a "typeof" operator which can give very basic information about the type of values we have at runtime. This "typeof" operator is expected to return a certain set of strings including - 

 - "string"
 - "number"
 - "bigint"
 - "boolean"
 - "symbol"
 - "undefined"
 - "object"
 - "function"

This operator comes up pretty often in a number of JavaScript libraries, and TypeScript can understand it to narrow types in different branches.

A Type Guard in Typescript is checking against the value returned by typeof. Because TypeScript encodes how "typeof" operates on different values, it knows about some of its quirks in JavaScript. For example, notice that in the list above, typeof doesn’t return the string null.

Let's see another example where we can use Type Guards - 

    function printElements(arr: string | string[] | null) {
        if (typeof arr === "object") {
            for (const s of arr) {
                console.log(s);
            }
        } else if (typeof arr === "string") {
            console.log(arr);
        } else {
            // do nothing
        }
    }

So, our "printElements" function takes an argument that can be either a "string" or it can be an array of strings or it is null.

So, if we have an array of strings, we want to print all its values one by one. If it is a simple string, we want to print this string itself. And if it is null, we will do nothing.

Now, if we see the list of Type Guards above, we see that there is no value that is "array". So, how can we check if a value is an array? Oh, maybe we can check if it is an object, right? Because an array is also an object in Javascript and "typeof" can return a value "object" if the value it is checked against is an object.

So, based on this, the above code should work perfectly.

But no, it does not!

We get an error at this line - 

    for (const s of arr) {

This error is for the "arr" variable and it says -

    'arr' is possibly 'null'

Wait what? How can "arr" be null if it is inside a type guard which ensures that it is an object?

Well, that's just one of those Javascript things. In JavaScript, "null" is also an object and you can vertify that if you do typeof null === "object". This will be true.

And so, since "arr" can be an array or null, in both cases, this if check will be true because both an array and null are objects in Javascript. And that's why Typescript throws an error.

Users with enough experience might not be surprised, but not everyone has run into this in JavaScript; luckily, TypeScript lets us know that "arr" was only narrowed down to string[] | null instead of just string[].

And this leads us to a concept in Typescript called "Truthiness Narrowing".



