In JavaScript, we can use any expression in conditionals.

By conditions, we mean operators like && and ||, the if statements, Boolean negations (!), and more. 

As an example, if statements don’t expect their condition to always have the type boolean.

In JavaScript, constructs like if first “coerce” their conditions to booleans to make sense of them, and then choose their branches depending on whether the result is true or false.

So, in Javascript, there are some values that all coerce to "false". These are - 

 - 0
 - NaN
 - "" (Empty String)
 - 0n (the bigint version of zero)
 - null
 - undefined

We can use this behavior for guarding against values like null or undefined.

Remember the example in last section?


    function printElements(arr: string | string[] | null) {
        if (typeof arr === "object") {
            for (const s of arr) {
                console.log(s);
            }
        } else if (typeof arr === "string") {
            console.log(arr);
        } else {
            // do nothing
        }
    }

We had the above function and it was giving an error saying "arr is possibly null".

And we understood that since "null" is also an object in Javascript, the first if condition is true not just for an array but also for a null value.

Now that we know "null" is coerced as "false" in Javascript, we can use this here.

So, we can change the first if statement to -

    if (arr && typeof arr === "object") {...}

So now, the error is gone. That's because before we check if "arr" is an object, we make sure that this is not some value that is coerced as "false" in Javascript. This ensures that if "arr" is null, then this condition if not valid.

And this is what is call "Truthiness narrowing" in Typescript.