TypeScript also uses switch statements and equality checks like ===, !==, ==, and != to narrow types.

    function example(x: string | number, y: string | boolean) {
        if (x === y) {
            x.toUpperCase();
            y.toLowerCase();
                
        } else {
            console.log(x);
        }
    }

Note that the function "example" takes two arguments "x" and "y", where "x" can be either a string or a number, while "y" can be either a string or a boolean.

Now, let's say that we want to use some string functions on both of them if both of them are strings.

One way could be to use typeof - 

    if (typeof x === "string" && typeof y === "string") {...}

But, we can also use a simple equality check here.

    if (x === y)

When we checked that x and y are both equal, TypeScript knew their types also had to be equal. Since string is the only common type that both x and y could take on, TypeScript knows that x and y must be strings in the first branch.

Now, it does not mean that this only worked with "===" and not with "==".

And we can use this equality check in a lot of places where we deal with null or undefined values. For example - 

    if (str !== null){ // do something }

JavaScript’s looser equality checks with == and != also get narrowed correctly. If you’re unfamiliar, checking whether something == null actually not only checks whether it is specifically the value null - it also checks whether it’s potentially undefined. The same applies to == undefined: it checks whether a value is either null or undefined.

    interface Container {
        value: number | null | undefined;
    }
 
    function multiplyValue(container: Container, factor: number) {
        // Remove both 'null' and 'undefined' from the type.
        if (container.value != null) {
            console.log(container.value);
        
            // Now we can safely multiply 'container.value'.
            container.value *= factor;
        }
    }

So, in the above code, we have an interface "Container" which has a property "value" which can be number, or null or undefined.

And so, when "multiplyValue" expects ab object of type "Container" to be passed as first argument, it also means that this object may have a "value" property as a number, null or undefined.

So, before we do anything with this "value" property, we have to first narrow it down.

We only want to do something if the "value" property is not null or undefined.

And so, we can use the equality check here using two equal signs "==" because as mentioend above, checking whether something == null actually not only checks whether it is specifically the value null - it also checks whether it’s potentially undefined.

So, when we say - 

    if (container.value != null) {...}

It not only makes sure that container.value is not null, but it also ensures that container.value is not undefined. So you do not have to write - 

    if (container.value != null && container != undefined) {...}


