JavaScript has an operator for determining if an object or its prototype chain has a property with a name: the in operator. TypeScript takes this into account as a way to narrow down potential types.

Suppose we have two types defined in the code -

    type Fish = { swim: () => void };
    type Bird = { fly: () => void };

And we have a function that accepts an argument of one of these two types - 


    function move(animal: Fish | Bird) {}

Now, if "animal" is of type "Fish", we want to call the "swim()" function on it. But if it is of type "Bird", we want to call the "fly" function on it.

And in such cases, we can make use of the "in" operator. We know that "swim" is a function that will be present only for "Fish" type and not for "Bird" type. 

This means, in the "animal" object, either "swim" does not exist, or it does. And if it does exist, it means the type of "Fish".

And that's something we can check using "in" operator.

    function move(animal: Fish | Bird) {
        if ("swim" in animal) {
            return animal.swim();
        }
 
        return animal.fly();
    }

So, when we say - 

    if ("swim" in animal) {...}

It means, run this if block only if the property "swim" exists in the animal object. In other words, we are telling with this code to only run this block if "animal" is of type "Fish".

# OPTIONAL PROPERTIES

It is worth noting that when the types have optional properties, then the behavior is a bit different.

For example, let's say apart from Fish and Bird, we have a third type "Human". 

    type Fish = { swim: () => void };
    type Bird = { fly: () => void };
    type Human = { swim?: () => void; fly?: () => void };

Note that for "Human", the propertyies "swim" and "fly" are optional properties (identified using a '?' in front of the name). So, what if we pass an argument that is one of these three types to the above function? How will Typescript narrow it down?

    function move(animal: Fish | Bird | Human) {
        if ("swim" in animal) {
            animal; 
        } else {
                animal;
        }
    }

The fist "if" check says that only run the code inside it if "swim" property exists in animal. Now, this will be true for both "Fish" and "Human" type.

And that's why, inside this if block, the object "animal" is not of type "Fish". It is of type "Fish | Human". And this makes sense.

Similarly, the else block only runs if there is no "swim" property in the "animal" object. But, that can be the case of "Human" type as well because "swim" is optional.

And that's why, in the else block, the type of "animal" is not "Bird". It is "Bird | Human".

So, do keep this in mind when working with optional properties in Types.