There is an operator in Javascript that lets us know if ab object is an instance of some other value. 

More specifically, in JavaScript "x instanceof Foo" checks whether the prototype chain of "x" contains "Foo.prototype".

The "instanceof" is also a Type Guard and Typescript narrows in branches guarded by "instanceof" operators.

For example, let's say we have a function that accepts either a "Date" object or a simple string.

    function logValue(x: Date | string) {....}
  
Now, if it is a Date, we want to print the UTC Date String. But if it is a string, we just want to print its uppercase version.

Ofcourse we will need narrowing here because the UTC Date String is something that we can only get for a date object, not for a string. And same with uppercase.

But, how do we check if "x" is an instance of Date? Well, we can use the "instanceof" operator here.

    function logValue(x: Date | string) {
        if (x instanceof Date) {
            console.log(x.toUTCString());
        } else {
            console.log(x.toUpperCase());
        }
    }

So, "x instanceof Date" will return either true or false, depending on whether "x" is an instance of Date or not. And only if it is an instance of "Date", we will then use the "toUTCString()" function on it because this function is only available for Date instances, not for string values.

If "x" is not a Date instance, then Typescript knows it will be a string because these are the only two types that "x" can have. And so, in that case, we will just print the uppercase version of the string.