We know that when we define a variable in Typescript, then Typescript will infer the type of that variable based on the value with which we declare this variable.

For example,

    let x = 1;

In this case, Typescript will infer the type of "x" as "number" because we initialized "x" with a number.

The benefit is that now, whenever we change the value of "x", it can only be assigned a number. So, we canno say - 

    x = "Hello World"

Typescript will throw an error in this case saying "Type 'string' is not assignable to type 'number'."

What if we define a variable such that it can either be a number or a string without actually defining the type?

For example - 

    let x = someCondition ? 10 : "Hello World"

So, we cannot say that "x" can only be a "string" or "x" can only be "number" just based on this declaration. Because the value of "x" depends on what the condition evaluates to. If the condition is True, the value will be a number but if it is false, the value will be a string.

And as you might have guessed, in this case, Typescript infers the type as - 

    string | number

What this means is that later, we can also assign this "x" a new value which may not be a number but it may be a string and it will be a valid assignment.

    let x = someCondition ? 10 : "Hello World"
    x = 10
    x = "Hello"

The above code is valid.

Note that when we say "x = 10", it does not change the type of "x" from "string | number" to just "number". This is a very important thing to keep in mind.

Even though the observed type of "x" changed to number after our first assignment, we were still able to assign a string to x. This is because the declared type of "x" - the type that "x" started with - is "string | number", and assignability is always checked against the declared type.