Up until this point, we’ve gone through some basic examples of how TypeScript narrows within specific branches. But there’s a bit more going on than just walking up from every variable and looking for type guards in ifs, whiles, conditionals, etc.

Let's take an example where we have multiple if else blocks and in each block, the type is diferent.


    function example() {
        let x: string | number | boolean;
        
        x = Math.random() < 0.5;
        
        console.log(x);
        
        if (Math.random() < 0.5) {
            x = "hello";
            console.log(x);        
        } else {
            x = 100;
            console.log(x);          
        }
        
        return x;
            
    }

So initially, we start with declaring a variable "x" that has a type as "string | number | boolean", meaning we can assign it any of these three type of values and it will be a valid assignment.

Now, note that after we declared it, we gave it an initial value of "Math.random() < 0.5" which is a boolean value. And still, if you hover over "x" its type will be "string | number | boolean". 

But, if you now console.log(x), and now hover over this "x" inside the console log, you will see that its type is now just "boolean".

The first if block will be true if Math.random() is < 0.5. And in that case, we are setting the value of "x" to be a string "hello". But still, if you hover over it, it is still of type "string | number | boolean". Only inside the console.log its type is "string".

And the same is the case of the else block.

And finally, when we return "x", you will see that its type is "string | number".

That's because Typescript sees an if else block and it knows that at least one of these two blocks will run. And if first if block runs, then x will become a string. But if second else block runs, "x" will be a number.

So, it means when we return "x", then it will either be a string or a number. That's why the type is inferred as "string | number".

This analysis of code based on reachability is called control flow analysis, and TypeScript uses this flow analysis to narrow types as it encounters type guards and assignments. When a variable is analyzed, control flow can split off and re-merge over and over again, and that variable can be observed to have a different type at each point.