So far, whatever we saw was existing Javascript constructs to handle narrowing. For example, the typeof operator, instanceof operator, in operator and so on.

Sometimes you want more direct control over how types change throughout your code.

What if we were able to define our own type guards?

For example, what if we can define functions that return whether some value is of a specific type or not?

In Typescript, we can use "Type predicates" to create user-defined guards.

    type Fish = { swim: () => void };
    type Bird = { fly: () => void };

So in the above code, we have two types. One has the "swim" function while other has "fly" function. We saw in the "in operator" narrowing that we can use the "in" operator to check if a value is of type Fish or Bird.

How can we define some function that returns whether a value is Fish or Bird.


    function isFish(pet: Fish | Bird): pet is Fish {
       return "swim" in pet;
    }

Note the return type of this function. It says "pet is Fish". What is this?

Well, this is something called "Type Predicate" in Typescript.

A predicate takes the form "parameterName is Type", where 
"parameterName" must be the name of a parameter from the current function signature.

Since we have "pet" as the name of the parameter in isFish method, we say "pet is Fish".

Any time isFish is called with some variable, TypeScript will narrow that variable to that specific type if the original type is compatible.

So, we can now use this function as -

    if (isFish(pet)) {
        pet.swim();
    } else {
        pet.fly();
    }

Notice that TypeScript not only knows that pet is a "Fish" in the if branch; it also knows that in the else branch, you don’t have a Fish, so you must have a Bird.

Ofcourse the above code doesn't really show a good use case of this Type Predicate.

But, suppose if we have an array of "Fish | Bird" values and we want to filter out the ones that are of type "Fish".

Suppose we have the following array - 

    const zoo: (Fish | Bird)[] = [getSmallPet(), getSmallPet(), getSmallPet()];

The getSmallPet() will either return a "Fish" type or "Bird" type value.

Now, to filter it, we can use our isFish method.

    const underWater1: Fish[] = zoo.filter(isFish);

Or, we can be more specific by saying -

    const underWater2: Fish[] = zoo.filter(isFish) as Fish[];

And let's say we want to filter out the Fish types but we also want to make sure if pet name is "sharky", then it is not added to the array. In some complex cases as well, we can use the Type Predicates -

    const underWater3: Fish[] = zoo.filter((pet): pet is Fish => {
        if (pet.name === "sharkey") return false;
        return isFish(pet);
    });

# CANNOT WE JUST USE "in" OPERATOR INSIDE OUT FUNCTION?

You might think that why are we even using this "pet is Fish" thing. Why cannot we just write a function as - 

    function isFish(pet: Fish | Bird): boolean {
       return "swim" in pet;
    }

To understand why this won't work as expected, let's take an example.

Suppose, we have an array of pets where a pet can be a Fish or a Bird type.

    let pets: (Fish | Bird)[] = [
        {swim: () => console.log("pet 1 can swim!")},
        {fly: () => console.log("pet 2 can fly!")},
        {swim: () => console.log("pet 3 can swim!")},
        {fly: () => console.log("pet 4 can fly!")},
    ]

Now, we want to loop over this list and if the pet is a fish, we want to call the swim() function and if it is a Bird, we want to call the fly() function.

So, let's use our function here.

    pets.forEach(pet => {
        if (isFish(pet)) {
            pet.swim();
        } else {
            pet.fly();
        }
    })

Oh wait! There is an error shown by Typescript for "pet.swim()" as well as "pet.fly()".

If we over over the "pet" variable inside the if or else block, we will see that its type is still "Fish | Bird". Somehow, even if the function tells if pet is a fish or not, Typescript is still not able to understand.

But, what if we had written - 

    pets.forEach(pet => {
        if ("swim" in pet) {
            pet.swim();
        } else {
            pet.fly();
        }
    })

Interesting! In this case, Typescript correctly infers that the type of "pet" inside if block is "Fish" and inside else block is "Bird".

But why cannot it understand this when we use our function? Because the function is doing the same thing.

Well, that is because Typescript is not smart enough to look inside the "isFish" function and see what is happening inside it. It can only infer the code based on what is directly around it. So all it knows is that the function "isFish" returns a boolean. But it has no idea why it returns a True or False.

We have to explicitly tell Typescript that we are indeed doing the type narrowing in this function. And that's what we tell Typescript using a "Type Predicate".


    function isFish(pet: Fish | Bird): boolean {
       return "swim" in pet;
    }

So, instead of returning directly a boolean, we return a "Type predicate". 

    function isFish(pet: Fish | Bird): pet is Fish {
       return "swim" in pet;
    }

And now we are telling Typescript that the object "pet" is of type 
"Fish" whenever the function returns true. And if the function returns "false", it means the object passed to this function is anything but of type "Fish". In our case, it means the "pet" is of type "Bird".
