Types can also be narrowed usin Assertion Functions.

In Typescript, assertion functions are a specific set of functions that "throw" an error if something unexpected happened. 

For example, Node.js has a dedicated function called "assert". 

    assert(someValue === 42);

If "someValue" is not "42", then "assert" will throw an "AssertionError".

In Javascript, these are often used to guard against improper types being passed in functions. For example - 

    function multiply(x, y) {
        assert(typeof x === "number");
        assert(typeof y === "number");
        return x * y;
    }

In Typescript however, these checks could never be properly added.

    function yell(str) {
        assert(typeof str === "string");
        return str.toUppercase();
        // Oops! We misspelled 'toUpperCase'.
        // Would be great if TypeScript still caught this!
    }

In case of above example, even though we misspelled "toUppercase()", typescript won't be able to catch it even if we have an "assert" function because these are evaluated at runtime and then forgotten.

Ultimately the goal of TypeScript is to type existing JavaScript constructs in the least disruptive way. For that reason, TypeScript 3.7 introduces a new concept called “assertion signatures” which model these assertion functions.

# ASSERTION SIGNATURES

The first type of assertion signature models the way that Node’s "assert" function works. It ensures that whatever condition is being checked must be true for the remainder of the containing scope.

    function assert(condition: any, msg?: string): asserts condition {
        if (!condition) {
            throw new AssertionError(msg);
        }
    }

Here, "asserts condition" means that whatever is the value of "condition" parameter, it must be a truthy value if the "assert" function returns something, otherwise it would throw an error. And this ensures that except for the "if" check, the entire scope has the "condition" as truthy.

The other type of "Assertion Signature" does not check for a condition, but it tells Typescript that a specific variable or property has a different type.

    function assertIsString(val: any): asserts val is string {
        if (typeof val !== "string") {
            throw new Error("Not a string!");
        }
    }

Here "asserts val is string" ensures that whenever we call "assertIsString" and pass any variable to it, that variable will then be known to be a string for the rest of the scope if the "assertIsString" function does not throw any error.

For example - 

    const aValue: string|number = "Hello"
    assertIsString(aValue)

Here, the "type" of "aValue" will be narrowed to a "string" because "assertIsString" won't throw any error for "aValue".

Now, let's take the example of the "yell" function that we discussed above and see how we can use the Assertion Signature in it.

    function yell(str: any) {
        assertIsString(str);

        // Now TypeScript knows that 'str' is a 'string'.
        return str.toUppercase();
        //         ~~~~~~~~~~~

        // error: Property 'toUppercase' does not exist on type 'string'.
        //        Did you mean 'toUpperCase'?
    }

So, in the above function, when we called "assertIsString" with "str" variable, we told Typescript that for the rest of the scope, consider "str" to be a string, even though we have mentioned its type as "any" in the function definition.

And hence, when we write "toUppercase()" and there is a spelling mistake, Typescript will catch it because it now considerts "str" to be of "string" type and "string" does not have any method named "toUppercase()".

These assertion signatures are very similar to writing type predicate signatures:

So, we can do the same thing as above with type predicates too -

    function isString(val: any): val is string {
        return typeof val === "string";
    }
    function yell(str: any) {
        if (isString(str)) {
            return str.toUppercase();
        }
        throw "Oops!";
    }

And just like type predicate signatures, these assertion signatures are incredibly expressive. We can express some fairly sophisticated ideas with these.

