Most of the time we are dealing with complex structures in our code, not just simple types like string, boolean and number.

Let’s imagine we’re trying to encode shapes like circles and squares. Circles keep track of their radiuses and squares keep track of their side lengths. We’ll use a field called "kind" to tell which shape we’re dealing with. Here’s a first attempt at defining Shape - 

    interface Shape {
        kind: "circle" | "square";
        radius?: number;
        sideLength?: number;
    }

So, let's try to write a function to get the area of a circle.

    function getArea(shape: Shape) {
        if (shape.kind === "circle") {
            return Math.PI * shape.radius ** 2;
        }
    }

Here, we first make sure the "kind" is "circle" and only then return the area of circle because we know that only if "kind" is "circle", the "radius" property will be set.

But still, we get an error -

    'shape.radius' is possibly 'undefined'.

Interestingly, while we know that "radius" will not be undefined in this case because it is a circle, Typescript cannot understand that.

Ofcourse to get around this we can use the non-null assertion to tell Typescript that we definitely know it won't be undefined.

    if (shape.kind === "circle") {
            return Math.PI * shape!.radius ** 2;
        }

But still, this is not ideal because we had to explicitly tell the type-checker what is the correct type.

The thing is, the type-checker does not have any way to know whether or not "radius" and "sideLength" are there based on "kind" property. And this is something we need to communicate to the type-checker.

So, let's now try to define Circle and Square separately - 

    interface Circle {
        kind: "circle";
        radius: number;
    }
 
    interface Square {
        kind: "square";
        sideLength: number;
    }

And now, we can define a "Shape" type which is the union of the two - 

    type Shape = Circle | Square;

So now, we have separated "Shape" into two types with different values for "kind" property and we have also mentioned that "radius" is a property only available if the "kind" is a "circle". Same with "sideLength".

Let's now try to write the same code but without "if" check -

    function getArea(shape: Shape) {
        return Math.PI * shape.radius ** 2;
    }

Ofcourse we will get an error here because "Shape" can be either "Circle" or a "Square". So, "radius" may or may not be defined.

Hence, we have to check for the "kind" property as well - 


    function getArea(shape: Shape) {
        if (shape.kind === "circle") {
            return Math.PI * shape.radius ** 2;
        }
    }

And now, we see no error at all!

When every type in a union contains a common property with literal types, TypeScript considers that to be a discriminated union, and can narrow out the members of the union.

In case of "Circle" and "Square", the common property was "kind" so that's what is considered a discriminant property of "Shape".

Checking whether the "kind" property was "circle" got rid of every type in "Shape" that didn’t have a kind property with the type "circle". That narrowed shape down to the type "Circle".

The same checking works with switch statements as well. Now we can try to write our complete getArea without any pesky ! non-null assertion - 



    function getArea(shape: Shape) {
        switch (shape.kind) {
            case "circle":
                return Math.PI * shape.radius ** 2;
            case "square":
                return shape.sideLength ** 2;
        }
    }

The important thing here was the encoding of Shape. Communicating the right information to TypeScript - that Circle and Square were really two separate types with specific "kind" fields - was crucial. Doing that lets us write type-safe TypeScript code that looks no different than the JavaScript we would’ve written otherwise. From there, the type system was able to do the “right” thing and figure out the types in each branch of our switch statement.