The "never" keyword represents the type of values that never occur.

For example, it may be a return type for a function that does not return anything -

    const reportError = function () {
        throw Error('my error');
    }

If you hover over the name of the function, its type will be - 

    () => never

Now, this "never" type is also possible with variables. What if we have a situation where they are narrowed by type guards that can never be true?

    function format(value: string | number) {
        if (typeof value === 'string') {
            return value.trim();
        } else {
            return value.toFixed(2); // we're sure it's number
        }

        // not a string or number
        // "value" can't occur here, so it's type "never"
    }

So, outside the if else block, the variable "value" has a type "never" because it just cannot be present outside one of these two blocks. It can either be a "number" or a "string" as defined in the function.

But, what is the use of this?

The "never" type is assignable to every type. But, no type is assignable to "never", except "never" itself.

It means, we cannot do something like -

    const abc: never = "Hello";

And this lets us do exhaustive checking in our code using "never".

For example, if we come to the "Circle" and "Square" example that we had in last section, we had a switch statement like this - 

    type Shape = Circle | Square;
 
    function getArea(shape: Shape) {
        switch (shape.kind) {
            case "circle":
                return Math.PI * shape.radius ** 2;
            case "square":
                return shape.sideLength ** 2;
        }
    }

Now, we know that the "kind" will always be either "circle" or "square". This means, even if we have a "default" case, it will never be called, unless ofcourse we have a third "kind" value introduced later down the road. And that's where the "never" type is useful to also keep track of those changes.

    type Shape = Circle | Square;
    
    function getArea(shape: Shape) {
        switch (shape.kind) {
            case "circle":
                return Math.PI * shape.radius ** 2;
            case "square":
                return shape.sideLength ** 2;
            default:
                const _exhaustiveCheck: never = shape;
                return _exhaustiveCheck;
        }
    }

So now, inside default, the "shape" variable should be "never" because as we know, we can assign only a "never" type to a "never" type. 

And this means, if we add a third member to the "Shape" union, it will cause an error - 

    interface Triangle {
        kind: "triangle";
        sideLength: number;
    }
 
    type Shape = Circle | Square | Triangle;

It will now throw an error inside the "default" block because "shape" is no longer a "never" type. It is now a "Triangle" type.

    Type 'Triangle' is not assignable to type 'never'.
