In this section, we will learn about some TypeScript patterns involving type predicates and assertion functions.

Let's start with 'Type Predicates' first.

Suppose we have -

    const values = ["a", "b", undefined, "c", undefined];
    const filteredValues = values.filter(value => Boolean(value));

Here, we are filtering out the undefined values from the array.

However, TypeScript does not know that the resulting array will only contain strings. It still considers the type of 'filteredValues' to be '(string | undefined)[]'.

This is not ideal because we know that the 'filteredValues' will be an array of strings after this filtering operation.

So, how do we tell TypeScript that 'filteredValues' is an array of strings?

Well, one way is to use the type assertion using 'as' keyword like this -

    const filteredValues = values.filter(value => Boolean(value)) as string[];

This solution seems a little bit hacky.

Well, there is a way to do this using 'Type Predicates' in TypeScript.

In TypeScript,  a Type Predicate is a special return type that allows you to narrow down the type of a variable within a conditional block. It is defined using the syntax - 

    'parameterName is Type'

In our case, we know that the function that we pass to the 'filter' method will return 'true' for string values and 'false' for undefined values. So, we can do -


    const filteredValues = values.filter((value): value is string => Boolean(value));

What did we do here?

Well, we defined a type predicate in the return type of the function that we passed to the 'filter' method. We said that if the function returns 'true', then the 'value' is of type 'string'.

And since the 'filter' method will only include values for which the function returns 'true', TypeScript can now infer that 'filteredValues' is of type 'string[]'.

With Type Predicates, we tell TypeScript that we know more about the type of a variable than it can infer on its own, and we can narrow down the type of a variable within a conditional block. This is very useful when working with arrays and filtering operations.

Now, the Type Predicates only work when the function returns a boolean value. If the function returns something other than a boolean, TypeScript will not be able to use the type predicate to narrow down the type of the variable.

Also, we cannot stretch the boundaries of the type that we are trying to narrow down. So, we cannot do -

    const filteredValues = values.filter((value): value is number => Boolean(value));

This will not work because the 'value' is either a 'string' or 'undefined' and it cannot be a 'number'. TypeScript will throw an error because we are trying to narrow down the type to something that is not possible.

Also, just like 'Type Assertion', you have to make sure that the type predicate is correct. If you make a mistake in the type predicate, TypeScript will not be able to infer the correct type and it may lead to errors.