Sometimes we have functions in our application that check for some condition and if that condition is not met, they throw an error.

For example, let's say we have -

    interface User {
        id: string;
        name: string;
    }

    interface AdminUser extends User {
        role: "admin";
        organizations: string[];
    }

    interface NormalUser extends User {
        role: "normal";
    }

We have three interfaces - 'User', 'AdminUser', and 'NormalUser'. Now, we want to create a function that checks if a user is an admin user or not. If the user is not an admin user, we want to throw an error.

    function assertUserIsAdmin(user: NormalUser | AdminUser) {
        if (user.role !== "admin"){
            throw new Error("Not an admin user!");
        }
    }

So, we might be using this function like this -

    const example = (user: NormalUser | AdminUser) => {
        assertUserIsAdmin(user);
        console.log(user);
    }

Now, looking at this code, we know t hat if the 'assertUserIsAdmin' function does not throw an error, then the 'user' variable must be of type 'AdminUser'.

But right now, if you hover over the 'user' variable inside the 'example' function after we called the 'assertUserIsAdmin' function, you will see that it is still of type 'NormalUser | AdminUser'.

Now, there is something called 'Assertion Functions' in TypeScript that can help us with this. Assertion functions are functions that throw an error if a certain condition is not met. They are used to assert that a certain condition is true.

The syntax is almost the same as the Type Predicates but while Type Predicates return a boolean value, Assertion Functions do not return anything. Instead, they throw an error if the condition is not met. The return type of an Assertion Function is  -

    asserts <Condition>

So in our case, we can change our 'assertUserIsAdmin' function to be an Assertion Function like this -

    function assertUserIsAdmin(user: NormalUser | AdminUser): asserts user is AdminUser {
        if (user.role !== "admin"){
            throw new Error("Not an admin user!");
        }
    }

Here, we have changed the return type of the 'assertUserIsAdmin' function to be 'asserts user is AdminUser'. This means that if the function does not throw an error, then the 'user' variable must be of type 'AdminUser'.

And now, if you hover over the 'user' variable inside the 'example' function after we called the 'assertUserIsAdmin' function, you will see that it is now of type 'AdminUser'.

This is how we can use Assertion Functions in TypeScript to check for certain conditions and narrow down the types of our variables.

Now, the Assertion Functions are as safe as Type Predicates which mean if you give a wrong type to the 'assertUserIsAdmin' function, TypeScript won't complain. So, we could do -

    function assertUserIsAdmin(user: NormalUser | AdminUser): asserts user is NormalUser {
        if (user.role !== "admin"){
            throw new Error("Not an admin user!");
        }
    }

Here, we have changed the return type of the 'assertUserIsAdmin' function to be 'asserts user is NormalUser'. This means that if the function does not throw an error, then the 'user' variable must be of type 'NormalUser'. But this is wrong because we are checking if the user is an admin user or not. 

Now, if we hover over the 'user' variable inside the 'example' function after we called the 'assertUserIsAdmin' function, you will see that it is of type 'NormalUser' because this is what we told TypeScript to assume.

So, just like Type Predicates, we need to be careful while using Assertion Functions and make sure that we are giving the correct types to them.