Alright, let's now see how can we combine type predicates with generics. This is a powerful combination that allows us to create flexible and reusable type guards.

Let's say we have two functions -

    export const isDivElement = (element: unknown): element is HTMLDivElement => {
        return element instanceof HTMLDivElement;
    }

    export const isBodyElement = (element: unknown): element is HTMLBodyElement => {
        return element instanceof HTMLBodyElement;
    }

Here, we have two type predicates, 'isDivElement' and 'isBodyElement', that check if a given element is an instance of 'HTMLDivElement' or 'HTMLBodyElement', respectively.

There are both using Type Predicates as we can see in the return type of both functions.

Let's say we have an interface -

    interface DOMNodeExtractorConfig<T, Result> {
        isNode: (node: unknown) => boolean;
        transform: (node: T) => Result;
    }

And a function -    

    const createDOMNodeExtractor = <T, TResult>(config: DOMNodeExtractorConfig<T, TResult>) => {
        return (nodes: unknown[]): TResult[] => {
            return nodes.filter(config.isNode).map(config.transform)
        }
    };

So, what is going on here?

Basically, we have a generic function 'createDOMNodeExtractor' that takes a configuration object of type 'DOMNodeExtractorConfig'. This configuration object has two properties: 'isNode', which is a function that checks if a node is of a certain type, and 'transform', which is a function that transforms the node into a desired result.

The 'createDOMNodeExtractor' function returns another function that takes an array of unknown nodes, filters them using the 'isNode' function, and then transforms the filtered nodes using the 'transform' function.

So, we can use it like this -

    const nodes = [document.createElement('div'), document.createElement('body'), document.createElement('span')];

    const extractDivElements = createDOMNodeExtractor<HTMLDivElement, string>({
        isNode: isDivElement,
        transform: (node) => node.id
    });

    const divIds = extractDivElements(nodes);

But right now, there is an issue with our code.

First, the 'map' function will show an error where we try to pass 'config.transform' to it -

    Argument of type '(node: T) => TResult' is not assignable to parameter of type '(value: unknown, index: number, array: unknown[]) => TResult'.
    Types of parameters 'node' and 'value' are incompatible.
        Type 'unknown' is not assignable to type 'T'.
        'T' could be instantiated with an arbitrary type which could be unrelated to 'unknown'.ts

Second, we cannot access 'innerText' on the 'div' because right now, it is of type 'unknown' and not 'HTMLDivElement'.

If you hover over the 'createDOMNodeExtractor' function, you will see -

    const createDOMNodeExtractor: <unknown, any>(config: {
        isNode: (node: unknown) => boolean;
        transform: (node: unknown) => any;
    }) => (nodes: unknown[]) => any[]

So, right now, the generic type parameters 'T' is being inferred as 'unknown' which is not ideal. What we want is that 'T' should be inferred as the 'HTMLDivElement' when we pass 'isDivElement' as the 'isNode' function. And if we pass 'isBodyElement', then 'T' should be inferred as 'HTMLBodyElement'.

We want this because we know that 'isNode' will be provided a function that checks if a node is of a certain type, so we want 'T' to be inferred as that type so that we can access the properties of that type in the 'transform' function without any issues.

Well, this is where we can use type predicates to our advantage. We can change the 'isNode' function in our 'DOMNodeExtractorConfig' to be a type predicate instead of just a boolean function. This way, TypeScript will be able to infer the correct type for 'T' based on the type predicate we pass in.

    interface DOMNodeExtractorConfig<T, Result> {
        isNode: (node: unknown) => node is T;
        transform: (node: T) => Result;
    }

As soon as we do this, both errors go away and if we hover over the 'createDOMNodeExtractor' function again, we will see -

    const createDOMNodeExtractor: <HTMLDivElement, string>(config: {
        isNode: (node: unknown) => node is HTMLDivElement;
        transform: (node: HTMLDivElement) => string;
    }) => (nodes: unknown[]) => string[]

So now, since 'T' is correctly inferred as 'HTMLDivElement', we can access 'innerText' on the 'div' without any issues because 'node' will now also be of type 'HTMLDivElement' in the 'transform' function.