When we talk about 'Unions' in TypeScript, one very powerful feature is 'Discriminated Unions'.

In simple terms, a Discriminated Union is a union of types that have a common property (the discriminant) which can be used to determine which type in the union is being used.

For example, let's say we have -

    type A = 
    | {
        type: 'a',
        a: string
    } | {
        type: 'b',
        b: string
    } | {
        type: 'c',
        c: string
    };

Here, we have a type 'A' which is a union of three different object types.

Notice how each object type has a 'type' property with a unique string literal value ('a', 'b', or 'c'). Since each type has this common property, we can use it to discriminate between the different types in the union. And so, 'A' is a Discriminated Union.

The benefit is that we can use the 'type' property to narrow down which specific type it is.

For example, let's say we have a function that uses this type:

    function handleA(obj: A) {
        obj.a; // This will cause a TypeScript error because 'obj' could be any of the three types in the union.
    }

Here, an error occurs because TypeScript cannot determine which type 'obj' is. We are trying to access the 'a' property, but 'obj' could be of type 'b' or 'c', which do not have an 'a' property.

But, since we know that each type in the union has a 'type' property, we can use that to narrow down the type:

    function handleA(obj: A) {
        if (obj.type === 'a') {
            console.log(obj.a); // Now TypeScript knows 'obj' is of type '{ type: 'a', a: string }'
        } else if (obj.type === 'b') {
            console.log(obj.b); // Now TypeScript knows 'obj' is of type '{ type: 'b', b: string }'
        } else if (obj.type === 'c') {
            console.log(obj.c); // Now TypeScript knows 'obj' is of type '{ type: 'c', c: string }'
        }
    }