The basic building block of any application are the Functions. They can be local functions or imported from another module or methods on a class. 

And the Functions are also "values". And just like other values, Typescript has many ways to describe how functions can be called.

The simplest way to describe a function is with a "Function Type Expression". 

In TypeScript, a function type expression represents the type of a function, including its parameter types and return type. Function type expressions can be used to define and annotate the types of functions, which helps in enforcing type safety and providing better code documentation.

The syntax is -

    (parameter1: type1, parameter2: type2, ...) => returnType

These are syntactically similar to arrow functions.

    function greeter(fn: (a: string) => void) {
        fn("Hello, World");
    }
    
    function printToConsole(s: string) {
        console.log(s);
    }
    
    greeter(printToConsole);

Here, we have a function named "printToConsole" that takes a string and prints that to console.

We have another function named "greeter" that is called such that it takes the name of a function as a parameter and then it will call that function inside it.

So, we are defining the parameter type for this "greeter function like this -
    
    (a: string) => void

It means it accepts a "function with one parameter named 'a', of type string, and that function shouldn't have any return type".

To make it cleaner, we can use Type aliasing as well - 

    type GreetFunction = (a: string) => void;
    function greeter(fn: GreetFunction) {
        // ...
    }

