In Javascript, the functions can have properties in addition to being callable. But, the "Function Type Expression" syntax does not allow declaring properties. 

If we want to describe something that is callable with properties, then we can write a "call signature" in an object type.

    type DescribableFunction = {
        description: string;
        (someArg: number): boolean;
    };

    function doSomething(fn: DescribableFunction) {
        console.log(fn.description + " returned " + fn(6));
    }
    
    function myFunc(someArg: number) {
        return someArg > 3;
    }
    myFunc.description = "default description";
    
    doSomething(myFunc);

So, we can see that we have a "myFunc" function that takes the "someArg" as a parameter which is a number and returns a boolean. But, alongside that, we are also setting a property on this function named "description". So, it is now not only callable but also has a property.

And that's something we cannot define using Function Type Expresions.

So, to define the types of these type of functions, we write the "call signature" of the function inside an object, just how we are doing in code above where we define "DescribableFunction" type.

We can see that this type says that the "DescribableFunction" has a property named "description", but it is also callable where we can call it by passing a "number" as argument and it will give us a "boolean".

This syntax is slightly different than the function type expression as we are using ":" between parameter list and return type, rather than "=>".