Alright, it's time to learn Type Transformations in TypeScript!

Let's start with something simple: getting the return type of a function.

We have done this before under the 'Essentials' section, but let's revisit it with a fresh perspective.

So, let's say we have a simple function.

    const myFunc = () => {
        return "hello";
    };

Here, we have a function 'myFunc' that returns a string "hello".

Now, how do we get the return type of this function?

One way is to manually see what the function returns and then define a type for it.

Something like -

    type MyFuncReturnType = string;

But, this is not always practical, especially when dealing with complex functions. Moreover, if we do this, then what if later we change the return type of the function? We would have to remember to change the type as well.

So, we want a way to automatically get the return type of the function. In this way, if in future we change the return type of the function, our type will automatically update as well.

What if TypeScript could infer the return type for us?

We know that we can get the type of anything in TypeScript using the 'typeof' operator.

So, let's see what happens when we use 'typeof' on our function.

    type MyFuncType = typeof myFunc;

Here, if we hover over 'MyFuncType', we'll see that it is of type -

    () => string

But in our case, we want the type of the return value, not the function itself.

Here, we can make use of the built-in utility type 'ReturnType'.

This utility type takes a function type as an argument and gives us the return type of that function.

Remember that it does not take the function itself, but its type.

And since we already have the type of the function using 'typeof', we can use it like this -

    type MyFuncReturnType = ReturnType<typeof myFunc>;

And boom! Now, if we hover over 'MyFuncReturnType', we'll see that it is of type -

    string

So, this is how we can get the return type of a function easily. We can pass it any complex function, and it will get the return type for us!
