In the last section, we learned how to extract the return type of a function using the 'ReturnType' utility type. Now, let's explore how to extract the parameter types of a function into a tuple type.

Let's take an example.

    const makeQuery = (url: string, opts?: {
        method?: string;
        headers?: {
            [key: string]: string;
        };
        body?: string;
    }) => {};

Here, we have a slightly more complex function 'makeQuery' that takes two parameters: a string 'url' and an optional object 'opts' with several optional properties.

Now, what we want is that we want to extract the parameter types of 'makeQuery'. Basically, we want all the parameters with their types to be extracted into a tuple.

Well, just like last time, TypeScript provides us with a built-in utility type called 'Parameters' that does exactly that.

This accepts a function type and returns a tuple type representing the types of its parameters.

So, we can write -

    type QueryParams = Parameters<typeof makeQuery>;

And now, if you hover over 'QueryParams', you'll see that it is of type -

    [url: string, opts?: {
        method?: string | undefined;
        headers?: {
            [key: string]: string;
        } | undefined;
        body?: string | undefined;
    } | undefined]

Note that this is a 'tuple type', which means that the order of the types matters, and each position in the tuple corresponds to a parameter in the function.

Since we have a tuple here, it means we can now use indexed access to get the type of individual parameters.

Let's say we want to get the type of the second parameter 'opts'. We can do that like this -

    type OptsType = QueryParams[1];