Now, let's take an example where we have an object type and we want to extract all the keys of that object as a union type.


Let's say we have -

    const testingFrameworks = {
        vitest: {
            label: "Vitest",
        },
        jest: {
            label: "Jest",
        },
        mocha: {
            label: "Mocha",
        }
    }

So, we want -

    type TestingFrameworks = "vitest" | "jest" | "mocha"

But we want this to be such that if in the future we add more testing frameworks to the 'testingFrameworks' object, the 'TestingFrameworks' type should automatically update to include the new keys.

We have already seen the 'typeof' operator which can be used to get the type of a variable. 

There is also a 'keyof' operator which can be used to get the keys of an object type as a union type.

What if we write -

    type TestingFrameworks = keyof testingFrameworks;

This will show an error saying -

    'testingFrameworks' refers to a value, but is being used as a type here. Did you mean 'typeof testingFrameworks'?t

This is because 'testingFrameworks' is a variable and we are trying to use it as a type. Remember that 'keyof' only works with types, not with values. So, first, we need to get the type of 'testingFrameworks' using 'typeof'.

What happens if we do -

    type TestingFrameworksType = typeof testingFrameworks;

This will give us a new type -

    type TestingFrameworksType = {
        vitest: {
            label: string;
        };
        jest: {
            label: string;
        };
        mocha: {
            label: string;
        };
    }

Now we can use the 'keyof' operator to get the keys of this type as a union type.

So, we can say -

    type TestingFrameworks = keyof TestingFrameworksType;

And if you hover over 'TestingFrameworks', you'll see that it is now -

    type TestingFrameworks = "vitest" | "jest" | "mocha"

This is exactly what we wanted!

We can also do this in one line without creating an intermediate type -

    type TestingFrameworks = keyof typeof testingFrameworks;

So, this is how we can create a union type from an object's keys using 'keyof' and 'typeof' operators in TypeScript.

The 'keyof' and 'typeof' are perhaps two of the most powerful operators in TypeScript when it comes to type transformations and inference. So, it is important to understand them well.
