Alright, so we have seen how we can create a generic type with a single type parameter. But what if we want to create a type that can work with multiple types? TypeScript allows us to define multiple type parameters in our generic types.

So, just like methods and functions, we can define multiple type parameters by separating them with commas.

Let's say we have this code -

    type PromiseFunc = (input: any) => Promise<any>;

    type Example1 = PromiseFunc<string, string>; // ERROR
    type Example2 = PromiseFunc<boolean, number>; // ERROR

We have a main type 'PromiseFunc' that is a function type which takes an input of type 'any' and returns a Promise of type 'any'. Now, we are trying to create two new types 'Example1' and 'Example2' by passing two type parameters each. However, this will result in an error because our main type 'PromiseFunc' is not defined to accept multiple type parameters.

In fact, it is not defined to even accept a single type parameter. To fix this, we need to modify our main type 'PromiseFunc' to accept two type parameters. So, how do we accept more than one type parameter? We can do this by defining multiple type parameters within the angle brackets, separated by commas, just like normal functions.

We want Example1 to be a type where the input is of type string and the Promise resolves to a string. Similarly, we want Example2 to be a type where the input is of type boolean and the Promise resolves to a number.

So, we can do -

    type PromiseFunc<T1,T2> = (input: T1) => Promise<T2>;

So, now, we are telling TypeScript that our main type 'PromiseFunc' accepts two type parameters 'T1' and 'T2'. 'T1' represents the type of the input parameter, and 'T2' represents the type of the value that the Promise resolves to.

And now, the type of 'Example1' will be -

    type Example1 = (input: string) => Promise<string>;

Similarly, the type of 'Example2' will be -

    type Example2 = (input: boolean) => Promise<number>;

And this is exactly what we wanted!

To make it easy to understand, we can change the names from 'T1' and 'T2' to something more meaningful like 'TInput' and 'TOutput' (for Type and Value).

    type PromiseFunc<TInput,TOutput> = (input: TInput) => Promise<TOutput>;